===== SOURCE FILE: PAD1344-PAD-P151972-R2015-0153-1-Box393177B-OUO-9.pdf =====

Document of
The World Bank

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY

Report No: PAD1344

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT

PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

ON A

PROPOSED LOAN

IN THE AMOUNT OF EUR €29.3 MILLION
(US $32 MILLION EQUIVALENT)

TO THE

REPUBLIC OF ALBANIA

FOR A

CITIZEN-CENTRIC SERVICE DELIVERY PROJECT

July 20, 2015

Governance Global Practice
EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the
performance of their official duties.  Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World
Bank authorization.
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized

PAD DATA SHEET
Albania
Citizen-centered public services (P151972)
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
EUROPE AND CENTRAL ASIA
0000009302
Report No.: PAD1344
Basic Information
Project ID
EA Category
Team Leader(s)
P151972
B - Partial Assessment
Jana Kunicova
Lending Instrument
Fragile and/or Capacity Constraints [   ]
Investment Project Financing
Financial Intermediaries [   ]

Series of Projects [   ]
Project Implementation Start Date
Project Implementation End Date
26-Aug-2015
30-Sep-2020
Expected Effectiveness Date
Expected Closing Date
02-Nov-2015
31-Dec-2020
Joint IFC

No

Practice
Manager/Manager
Senior Global Practice
Director
Country Director
Regional Vice President
Adrian Fozzard
Mario Marcel Cullell
Ellen A. Goldstein
Cyril E Muller
Borrower: Ministry of Finance
Responsible Agency: Ministry of State for Innovation and Public Administration
  Contact:
Milena Harito
  Title:
Minister
  Telephone No.: 355662002223
  Email: milena.harito@inovacioni.gov.al
Project Financing Data(in USD Million)
[ X ]
Loan
[   ]
IDA Grant [   ]
Guarantee
[   ]
Credit [   ]
Grant
[   ]
Other

Total Project Cost:
74.10
Total Bank Financing:
32.00
Financing Gap:
0.00

Financing Source
Amount
Borrower
42.10
International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development
32.00
Total
74.10
Expected Disbursements (in USD Million)
Fiscal
Year
Annual
10.00
8.30
6.70
4.30
2.70
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Cumulati
ve
10.00
18.30
25.00
29.30
32.00
32.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Institutional Data
Practice Area (Lead)
Governance
Contributing Practice Areas

Cross Cutting Topics
[   ]
Climate Change
[   ]
Fragile, Conflict & Violence
[   ]
Gender
[   ]
Jobs
[   ]
Public Private Partnership
Sectors / Climate Change
Sector (Maximum 5 and total % must equal 100)
Major Sector
Sector
%
Adaptation
Co-benefits %
Mitigation
Co-benefits %
Public Administration, Law, and
Justice
Public administrationOther social services

Public Administration, Law, and
Justice
General public
administration sector

Total
 I certify that there is no Adaptation and Mitigation Climate Change Co-benefits information

Does the project depart from the CAS in content or in other significant
respects?
Yes [   ]
No [ X ]
Does the project require any waivers of Bank policies?
Yes [   ]
No [ X ]
Have these been approved by Bank management?
Yes [   ]
No [   ]
Is approval for any policy waiver sought from the Board?
Yes [   ]
No [ X ]
Does the project meet the Regional criteria for readiness for implementation?
Yes [ X ]
No [   ]
Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project
Yes
No
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01
X

Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04

X
Forests OP/BP 4.36

X
Pest Management OP 4.09

X
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11

X
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10

X
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12

X
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37

X
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50

X
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60

X
Legal Covenants
Name
Recurrent
Due Date
Frequency
No activity will be undertaken which
will result in involuntary resettlement
X

Description of Covenant

Conditions
Source Of Fund
Name
Type
IBRD
Condition of Effectiveness
Effectiveness
Description of Condition
The Additional Condition of Effectiveness consist of the following, namely, that the Borrower, through
MIPA, has prepared and adopted a Project Operations Manual in a manner satisfactory to the Bank.
Source Of Fund
Name
Type
IBRD
Conditions of Disbursement
Disbursement
Description of Condition

1.  The disbursements under the results-based financing (RBF) part of the loan are contingent upon the
borrower achieving the agreed results, captured by the disbursement-linked indicators (DLIs).  The
disbursements will be made against sufficient eligible expenditure programs (EEPs).
2.  No disbursements under RBF will be made until DLI#5 is achieved.
Source Of Fund
Name
Type
IBRD
Condition of Effectiveness
Effectiveness
Description of Condition
The Borrower has established a Project Management Unit comprising of staff with qualifications,
experience and under terms of reference satisfactory to the Bank.
Team Composition
Bank Staff
Name
Role
Title
Specialization
Unit
Jana Kunicova
Team Leader
(ADM
Responsible)
Senior Public
Sector Specialist

GGODR
Benedicta T. Oliveros
Procurement
Specialist
Procurement
Analyst

GGODR
Jonida Myftiu
Financial
Management
Specialist
Financial
Management
Specialist

GGODR
Bekim Imeri
Safeguards
Specialist
Senior Social
Development
Specialist

GSURR
Cem Dener
Team Member
Sr Public Sector
Spec.

GGODR
Esma Kreso
Safeguards
Specialist
Senior
Environmental
Specialist

GENDR
Evis Sulko
Team Member
Senior Country
Operations Officer

ECCAL
Jose C. Janeiro
Team Member
Senior Finance
Officer

WFALA
Kimberly D. Johns
Team Member
Governance
Specialist

GGODR
Maria Eugenia Davalos
Team Member
Senior Economist

GPVDR
Nightingale RukubaNgaiza
Counsel
Senior Counsel

LEGLE
Stephen Rimmer
Team Member
Senior Private
Sector
Development
Specialist

GGODR
Zubair Khurshid Bhatti
Team Member
Sr Public Sector

GGODR

Mgmt. Spec.
Extended Team
Name
Title
Office Phone
Location

Locations
Country
First
Administrative
Division
Location
Planned Actual
Comments

Consultants (Will be disclosed in the Monthly Operational Summary)
Consultants Required ?
Consulting services to be determined

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS

(Exchange Rate Effective June 2, 2015)

Currency Unit = Albanian Lek (ALL)
ALL 127.7 = US$1
US$ = SDR 1

FISCAL YEAR
January 1
–
December 31

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

ADISA
Agency for Delivery of Integrated Services in Albania
ALLUIIA
Agency for Legalization, Urbanization and Integration of
the Informal Areas and Buildings
BER
Budget Execution Report
BOSS
Business One Stop Shop
BPR
Business Process Re-engineering
BSA
Bankruptcy Supervision Agency
CFCU
Central Financing and Contracting Unit
CFM
Citizen Feedback Mechanism
CHIF
Compulsory Health Insurance Fund
CoM
Council of Ministers
CPF
Country Partnership Framework
CQS
Selection based on Consultants Qualifications
CRA
Coordinating Regulatory Authority
CRR
Civil Records Registry
CSC
Citizen Service Center
DC
Direct Contracting
DLI
Disbursement Linked Indicators
DU
(Prime Minister’s Office) Delivery Unit
ECA
Europe and Central Asia
EEP
Eligible Expenditure Programs
EMP
Environmental Management Plan
EU
European Union
EU DESI
European Union Digital Economy and Society Index
EU-SIGMA
European Union Support for Improvement in Governance and
Management
FBS
Fixed Budget Selection
FDI
Foreign Direct Investment
FM
Financial Management
FMIS
Financial Management Information System

FMM
Financial Management Manual
GBD
General Bailiff Directorate
GDP
General Directorate of Prisons
GDRTS
General Directorate of Road Transport Services
GoA
Government of Albania
GPN
General Procurement Notice
GRM
Grievance Redress Mechanism
HII
Health Insurance Institute
HSIP
Health Systems Improvement Project
HR
Human Resources
HRM
Human Resource Management
HRMIS
Human Resource Management Information System
HSC
High State Control
IBRD
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
IC
Individual Consultant Selection
ICB
International Competitive Bidding
ICT
Information and Communications Technology
IDA
International Development Association
IFR
Interim Financial Reports
ILMP
Integrated Land Management Project
IOC
Incremental Operating Costs
IPA
Instrument for Pre-Accession
IPF
Investment Project Financing
IPRO
Immovable Property Registration Office
IPSC
Inter-Ministerial Public Services Committee
ISP
Implementation Support Plan
IT
Information Technology
KPI
Key Performance Indicator
LCS
Least-Cost Selection
MIPA
Ministry of Innovation and Public Administration
MoF
Ministry of Finance
MoH
Ministry of Health
MoI
Ministry of Interior
MoLSA
Ministry of Labor and Social Affairs
M&E
Monitoring and Evaluation
NAIS
National Agency for Information Service
NCB
National Competitive Bidding
NCR
National Civil Registry
NEA
National Examination Agency
NLC
National Licensing Center
NRC
National Registration Center
NSDI
National Strategy for Development and Integration
OGP
Open Government Partnership
OP
Operational Policy
OSS
One Stop Shop
PAS
Procurement Accredited Staff

PDF
Portable Document Format
PDO
Project Development Objective
PEFA
Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability
PFM
Public Financial Management
PIT
Personal Income Tax
POM
Project Operational Manual
PM
Prime Minister
PMU
Project Management Unit
PPF
Project Preparation Facility
PPP
Public Private Partnership
PRCA
Property Restitution and Compensation Agency
QBS
Quality-Based Selection
QCBS
Quality and Cost-Based Selection
RBF
Results Based Financing
RFP
Request for Proposal
RPM
Regional Procurement Manager
SAA
Stabilization and Association Agreement
SAI
Supreme Audit Institution
SAMP
Social Assistance Modernization Project
SC
Steering Committee
SCD
Systematic Country Diagnostic
SH
Shopping
SII
Social Insurance Institute
SORT
Systematic Operations Risk-rating Tool
SMS
Short Message Service
SSS
Single Course Selection
SW
Staff Week
TA
Technical Assistance
ToR
Terms of Reference
TPV
Third Party Validation
UN
United Nations
UNODC
United Nations Office of Drugs and Crimes
USAID
United States Agency for International Development
USD
United States Dollar
WDI
World Development Indicators
WG
Working Group

Regional Vice President:
Cyril E. Muller
Country Director:
Ellen A. Goldstein
Senior Global Practice Director:
Mario Marcel Cullel
Practice Manager:
Adrian Fozzard
Task Team Leader(s):
Jana Kunicova

i

ALBANIA
Citizen Centric Service Delivery Project

TABLE OF CONTENTS

Page
I.
STRATEGIC CONTEXT .................................................................................................1
A. Country Context ............................................................................................................ 1
B. Sectoral and Institutional Context ................................................................................. 2
C. Higher Level Objectives to which the Project Contributes .......................................... 4
II.
PROJECT DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVES (PDO) ....................................................6
B. Project Beneficiaries ..................................................................................................... 6
C. PDO Level Results Indicators ....................................................................................... 6
III.
PROJECT DESCRIPTION ..............................................................................................7
A.  Project Components ...................................................................................................... 7
B. Project Financing ........................................................................................................ 11
C. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design ................................................ 12
IV.
IMPLEMENTATION .....................................................................................................12
A.  Institutional and Implementation Arrangements ........................................................ 12
B.  Results Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) ............................................................... 13
C.  Sustainability............................................................................................................... 13
V.
KEY RISKS ......................................................................................................................14
Risk Rating Summary ....................................................................................................... 14
VI.
APPRAISAL SUMMARY ..............................................................................................14
A. Financial and Economic Analysis ............................................................................... 14
B. Technical ..................................................................................................................... 16
C. Financial Management ................................................................................................ 17
E. Environment (including Safeguards) .......................................................................... 18
F. Social (including Safeguards) ..................................................................................... 19
G. World Bank Grievance Redress .................................................................................. 21
Annex 1: Results Framework and Monitoring .........................................................................22
Annex 2:  Detailed Project Description ......................................................................................28

ii

Annex A2-1. List of core administrative services for the project ............................................43
Annex A2-2.  Definition of e-Service Levels and Expansion of e-Albania Program ..............53
Annex 3: Implementation Arrangements ..................................................................................56
Annex 4:  Implementation Support Plan ...................................................................................76

I.
STRATEGIC CONTEXT
A. Country Context
1.
Albania, Europe’s poorest nation in the early 1990s, attained middle income status
in 2008.  This impressive achievement was due to strong growth prior to the 2008 financial
crisis.  Growth was driven mostly by domestic consumption, boosted by foreign transfers and
remittances.  Albania’s per capita income gap with the European Union (EU) substantially
narrowed over this period: from 18 percent of average EU incomes in 1998 to 30 percent in
2012.  From 2002 to 2008, poverty declined from 25.4 percent to 12.5 percent. Shared prosperity
improved as well, with consumption by the bottom 40 percent of the income distribution
growing faster than the country’s average.  However, the financial crisis of 2008 interrupted this
positive growth trajectory. Albania’s growth averaged less than 3 percent per annum in real
terms between 2009 and 2012. Growth slowed further in 2013 and 2014 to an average 1.7 per
annum.
2.
The World Bank’s Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD, 2015) identifies the
delivery of basic public services as a constraint on accumulation and efficient use of assets
needed for sustainable and equitable growth. The SCD finds that the major sources of
inefficiency in service delivery are due to corruption and fragmented institutional arrangements.
It also points to socio-economic and spatial inequalities in access to services affecting the less
well-off and vulnerable population sub-groups, such as rural residents, women, and the Roma.
In light of the existing fiscal constraints, improvements in quality and access to services will
have to come from efficiency gains.
3.
Institutional reforms aimed at reducing corruption are also at the forefront of the
EU’s requirements for Albania’s progress toward further EU integration.  Albania
implemented a Stabilization and Association Agreement (SAA) since April 2009 and was
granted candidate status in June 2014.  The most recent EU Progress Report (October 2014)
acknowledges there is political will to fight corruption and highlights the most important
challenges ahead of Albania’s EU accession.  These include: strengthening the rule of law,
reforms in the public administration, including professionalization and de-politicization, anticorruption efforts and improving competitiveness and the business environment. One of the main
objectives of the EU assistance in these sectors through the new Instrument for Pre-Accession
(IPA II, 2014-2020) is to strengthen democratic institutions and support the public administration
reform process. IPA II will also support improvements in public service delivery and the
preparation and implementation of national legislation in line with the European standards and
best practice. The World Bank is working with the EU and other development partners to
coordinate support toward these goals.
4.
While some progress has been made over the last decade, citizens still view
corruption as a significant problem, especially in health, police, customs, and property
registration services.  A 2011 survey of corruption in Albania conducted by the United Nations
Office for Drugs and Crimes (UNODC) found that Albanian citizens rank corruption as the
second most important problem facing their country, after unemployment. According to the
survey, 8 out of 10 Albanian citizens interacted with the public administration at some point
during the 12 months prior to the survey and 28.3 percent of respondents were exposed - either
directly or through a household member – to bribery of a public official.  Bribery prevalence rate

– the percentage of citizens paying a bribe – was 19.3 percent with the most corrupt services
being health care (over 70 percent of payments to doctors and 45 percent to nurses), police (14
percent) and property registration officers (7 percent). Recourse to private intermediation, bribes
or facilitation payments to access services is facilitated where services are face-to-face.  While
business process and e-governance reform efforts have improved business services, such
measures have not yet been applied to administrative services.  Property and pension records, for
example, are only partially digitized. Citizens are increasingly dissatisfied and vocal in
expressing their dissatisfaction with public sector inefficiency and corruption. This partly reflects
changing expectations. A generation of Albanians that came of age in the post-communist era
has been exposed to high service standards in Europe. Further sensitized by an assertive print and
electronic media, this cohort, unlike their parents, demands much more from the state.
B. Sectoral and Institutional Context
Government Program
5.
The Government of Albania (GoA) began a bold reform program of public service
delivery, entitled “Innovation against Corruption,” in June 2014. Elected in 2013 with a
mandate to reduce corruption, the GoA intends to fundamentally change how public services are
provided through a variety of interventions, including the creation of a one-stop-shop for
administrative services, regulatory reform, re-engineering how services are approved, increasing
the number of services provided online, and implementing performance management measures.
The GoA’s objectives in implementing these reforms are to reduce the scope for corruption,
foster a citizen-focused ethos for provision of public services, and reduce the time of service
delivery both for citizens and businesses.
6.
The proposed one-stop-shop citizen service center (CSC) in Tirana, regulatory
reform, process re-engineering, and automation are key elements of this strategy. The CSC
would offer over 300 national government services from multiple ministries and agencies. This
will allow for the separation of front office service delivery from back office administrative
processes. Establishing mechanisms for citizen feedback on the quality and timeliness of service
delivery will provide the necessary data to manage performance. Through these reforms the
government plans to focus on the quality and speed of customer service and reduce opportunities
for corruption.
Reform Progress
7.
The Government’s timeline for the reform is very ambitious. As part of Phase 1,
which began in 2014, the government has established Working Groups (WGs) at the ministry
and agency level. WGs will prepare an inventory of regulations and administrative procedures
underpinning the delivery of selected services and regulatory approvals for licenses and permits.
For each service, license and approval, potential improvements in regulations and administrative
processes will be identified and elaborated in a legal inventory and process maps. In Phase 2, the
Government will implement the recommendations arising from a regulatory review and process
re-engineering to improve service delivery, automate some of the re-engineered services to be
provided online, and establish monitoring and evaluation processes.  The central CSC that will
provide all priority services will be established in Tirana by the first half of 2017. Phase 3
envisages ongoing expansion and improvement of the delivery of services. The Government

proposes to automate 90 percent of the selected government services for online service provision
by 2020.
8.
There are several parallel public service delivery automation initiatives currently
underway in Albania. The e-Albania portal (www.e-albania.al) offers over 500 services as of
June 2015 (see Annex A2.2 for the details). Currently, the number of institutions connected to
the Government Gateway is 21. Eleven other institutions will be connected by the end of 2015.
Hence, in total, there will be 32 institutions connected to the Government Gateway at the end of
2015. Other digital government initiatives include: online procurement; digitization of 20 percent
of property records; modernized business registration and licensing services; digital signature
capability embedded in biometric IDs (introduced in Jan 2014); and digitization of passports and
national identification number. Digitization of government records and systems is expected to
accelerate over the next year. According to the Council of Ministers’ (CoM) Decision no. 961,
dated November 24, 2010, National Agency for Information Society (NAIS) is the coordinating
and regulatory authority (CRA) for state databases. NAIS as a CRA is responsible for the
Government Interoperability Platform. According to the CoM’s Decision no. 945, dated
November 11, 2012, NAIS, maintains the register of state database and register of e-services.
NAIS continues to automate government application forms and processes, linking existing
databases and providing for legally verifiable electronic documents through expanding the use of
digital signatures. Estimated levels of automation of services provided through e-Albania portal
are summarized in Annex 2, together with the details of e-government initiatives in Albania.
9.
As part of Phase 2, the Government of Albania intends to construct a central CSC
building in Tirana. This facility will offer citizens and business physical access to over 300
government services currently offered by multiple ministries and agencies. Notwithstanding the
NAIS’ efforts to automate processes for online service provision, there will be a need for a
physical presence where citizens can access services in person for the foreseeable future given
modest levels of internet penetration at only 60 internet users per 100 people in 2013 (WDI).
Moreover, the GoA values the symbolic significance of a new building, highlighting a new
citizen-focused approach to government service delivery. The core features and size of this new
building have not been decided. Potential models for its financing, construction and
management, including public-private partnerships (PPPs), are also currently being considered.
This facility may also house ministries, agencies and private sector firms, given its potentially
large footprint.  The site for the building in the center of Tirana has already been selected.
10.
The Albanian government is keen to actively communicate with citizens to seek
feedback on the quality of services delivered. In addition to improving the monitoring of
service delivery performance across the country over a range of services, proactive
communication from the center of government will help increase a positive perception among
citizens of state responsiveness. Over time, such communication also may eventually reduce
citizen distrust. With technical assistance from the World Bank, the Government has recently
launched a pilot citizen feedback mechanism in four hospitals and two property registration
offices, where citizens’ mobile numbers are being recorded as they access services.  More than
10,000 citizens receiving health and property registration services have been contacted, via text
messages, during November 2014 to seek feedback on their experience with these services.
Around 22 percent of citizens have replied. While some have reported bad service delivery,
many have expressed thanks for this proactive contact. The Prime Minister has reviewed the

initial progress to monitor corruption and service delivery quality and has ordered its expansion
to other ministries.
Inter-agency coordination
11.
The Inter-Ministerial Public Services Committee (IPSC) chaired by the Prime
Minister provides strategic guidance for the reform.   This high level committee includes
Ministers that oversee all involved service provision agencies.  Strategic Planning Committee,
also chaired by the Prime Minister, will approve the Reform Policy Document that will detail the
strategic plan for the reform.
12.
A Technical Inter-Ministerial Committee chaired by the Minister of State for
Innovation and Public Administration will oversee and lead regulatory reform and process
re-engineering. WGs have been established at the ministerial and agency level. They are
responsible for core regulatory reform and re-engineering tasks related to the government
services. Specifically, they are tasked with completing the regulation review, validation of the
existing legal inventory, and recommending re-engineering of the services they provide
including necessary legal reforms. Re-engineering focuses on 10 key government agencies that
provide 169 core services (Annex A2-1). The re-engineering process is expected to be completed
by March 2016. Reform of government services and repeal of licenses, permits, and approvals
will be implemented through omnibus legislation, expected to be passed by the end of 2016.
13.
The Prime Minister’s Office Delivery Unit (DU) continues to provide extensive
support to the preparation of this reform program. The DU was established in February 2014
to track progress on six Prime Minister’s priorities; one of these priorities is service delivery by
citizen service centers, the others are water; energy; foreign direct investment (FDI); structural
reform; and land.  The DU is currently operating with five staff. The Unit’s mandate is to work
with and across ministries to unblock barriers to delivery, facilitate inter-ministerial collaboration
on priorities, engage in resolving implementation obstacles, and track implementation progress
toward targets through transparent monitoring mechanisms. The DU will support project
preparation and implementation with regard to:
(a) Coordination and support to the Ministerial service delivery working groups;
(b) Input into the design of the one-stop-shop model;
(c) Inter-ministerial and agency coordination between NAIS, Agency for Delivery of
Integrated Services in Albania (ADISA), and line ministries;
(d) High level reporting of overall progress of the reform to the Council of Ministers; and
(e) Development and application of consistent and integrated monitoring and evaluation
processes to measure the impacts of the reforms over time.
14.
The DU will play an important role in monitoring progress throughout the reform.
Once the citizen feedback mechanism is in place, the data collected will be analyzed and
presented by the DU team in various forums to ensure the data is used to improve the
performance of front line service delivery.
C. Higher Level Objectives to which the Project Contributes
15.
The SCD identified “enhancing governance, transparency and accountability of
government” as one of the top five priorities to stimulate growth, reduce poverty and
enhance shared prosperity.  Specifically, it points to the need to improve the quality and
efficiency of public services as well.  The SCD also identifies inequalities in public service

provision as a key issue.  The new Country Partnership Framework (CPF) (2015-2018) has three
focus areas mirroring the identified fundamental priorities identified by the SCD.  This project
will fall under the Focus Area 3, entitled “Strengthening public sector management and service
delivery.”  The CPF objective to which the project will contribute most is “increased efficiency
of public service delivery.”
16.
 Improving service delivery, increasing transparency, reducing scope for corruption
and enhancing the accountability of government underpin this CPF objective.  The goal is
for citizens to benefit from improved access to administrative services, greater efficiency in the
delivery of these services, reduced transaction time, and a reduction in petty corruption.  This
will translate into time savings for all service users.  Special efforts will be taken to identify the
needs of the poor and vulnerable groups and improve their access to administrative services.
17.
The proposed operation complements the existing Bank engagement on service
delivery in several sectors.  The ongoing Social Assistance Modernization Project (SAMP)
supports social assistance reforms for greater transparency and equity. The focus of the project is
better targeting, greater access and higher quality of service delivery. The proposed operation
complements SAMP by improving quality and access of administrative portion of social
assistance services, such as application for pensions. Similarly, the recently approved Health
Systems Improvement Project (HSIP) will support reforms in the health sector, including
strengthening management systems and improving efficiency and quality of services. Both
SAMP and HSIP have strong components that aim at service reengineering, digitization of
databases, and service automation for preventive and curative services. The proposed project will
focus on administrative services that can be provided in the CSC.  In addition, there are strong
synergies with the Integrated Land Management Project (ILMP) currently under preparation.  In
addition to filling the IT systems gaps for the organizations not covered by the proposed and
ongoing Bank projects, the proposed project will also complement the three projects by
improving information access, enhancing beneficiary feedback mechanisms, implementing high
level performance management, improving interoperability and integration of databases with
NAIS, and improving online and physical access of the relevant administrative services.
18.
Improvements in service delivery contribute to the twin goals of reducing poverty
and enhancing shared prosperity by creating an enabling environment for inclusive
growth.  As a result of the project, the efficiency of delivery of administrative government
services will be increased for the benefit of all citizens, enhancing their ability to accumulate and
use assets to generate income. In addition, the project will pay particular attention to the poor and
underserved population to ensure they can access these services.  For example, better and more
efficient access to the health insurance card will contribute to the build-up of human capital,
including for the poor and underserved, and to protecting households from health-related income
shocks. Increased and facilitated access to old-age pension – a key component of household
income in Albania for all socio-economic groups – may smooth the transition into retirement.
Finally, shared prosperity will be boosted by lower levels of corruption public services, which
affects the less well-off and women in Albania disproportionately more.
19.
The proposed operation is aligned with the Government’s program. The project
supports “Innovation against Corruption,” the Government’s reform program underpinning one
of the six top priorities identified by the Prime Minister and Cabinet: service delivery by citizen
service centers.  More broadly, the GoA is in the process of finalizing its new National Strategy
for Development and Integration (NSDI).  The draft NSDI outlines a vision that promotes strong,

sustained, and environmentally-friendly economic growth to establish greater well-being among
the citizens in an increasingly cohesive society and in an inclusive manner.  This vision will be
achieved by focusing on innovative governance for serving the citizens. The new Strategy is
expected to focus on promoting equitable service delivery, as well as on increasing the efficiency
and transparency of social services.  The latter is expected to be achieved through enhanced use
of performance management and information technology.  Further, the project objectives align
closely to the GoA’s Open Government Partnership (OGP) Second Action Plan for 2014-2016,
specifically with the goals of reducing corruption, improving delivery of public services, and
reducing administrative burden.
II.
PROJECT DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVES (PDO)
A. PDO
20.
The objective of the project is to improve the efficiency of delivery and access to selected
administrative services in Albania.
B. Project Beneficiaries
21.
Citizens are the intended beneficiaries of the project. Citizens will benefit from
improved access to administrative services, greater efficiency in the delivery of these services,
reduced transactions time and a reduction in petty corruption. This will translate into time and
monetary savings for service users.  Development of proactive feedback mechanisms will allow
the beneficiaries to identify improvements in services that would better address their needs.
Businesses will also enjoy advantages from the project’s activities.
22.
While all citizens are expected to benefit from the project, particular effort will be
taken to identify the needs of the poor and vulnerable to preserve and enhance their access
to administrative services. Poor are defined as persons living below poverty line. Vulnerable
are defined as the bottom 40 percent, women, older citizens, and ethnic minorities (e.g. Roma).
Annex 2 (Box A2-1) provides further details on the poor and vulnerable.
C. PDO Level Results Indicators
23.
Improvements in efficiency of delivery and access to administrative services will be
assessed using indicators that are generated from administrative data, data voluntarily
provided by service users, and through periodic user surveys.  Annex 1 sets out the Results
Framework that includes the indicators for the proposed PDO, as well as the suggested
intermediate and disbursement linked indicators (DLIs).   The key outcomes to be achieved
corresponding to the PDO indicators are as follows:
PDO Indicator 1: Increased efficiency in delivering administrative services through
reduction in processing times, as measured by the reduction in time required for citizens
to obtain selected administrative services (generated by periodic surveys)

PDO Indicator 2:  Increased access of the poor and vulnerable, as measured by the
proportion of the poor and vulnerable using administrative services (generated by
periodic surveys, disaggregated by gender and income group)
24.
The quality of administrative service delivery will be measured by the reduction in
time required for citizens to obtain services as reported by citizens. While administrative

data record time necessary to obtain selected services, often administrative data does not reflect
citizens’ experience. For example, administrative data on processing applications for property
registration does not account for the time that the citizen spent gathering all required
documentation, which is often measured in months rather than days.  The proposed PDO
indicators based on periodic surveys will thereby measure the improved citizens’ experience
dealing with the state.
25.
Although the project covers services provided by 10 key agencies that provide 169
core services, three representative services were selected for measuring PDO. These include:
(i) obtaining a motor vehicle registration; (ii) obtaining a health insurance card; and (iii)
processing an application for old age pension.  These three services are provided by three distinct
agencies and are widely used.  Two out of three (health card and pension) are particularly
important for the poor and vulnerable.   If possible, periodic surveys will cover a wider set of
services than these three to provide for a broader framework for assessment of the quality of
service delivery.
26.
Service user feedback will be used to assess performance and the prevalence of
corruption. Ultimately, the project will contribute to reducing petty corruption. It is very
difficult to accurately measure corruption using survey information. If aggregate perception
indices are used, the results are difficult to interpret because survey responses are influenced by a
host of environmental factors. However, feedback can be sought from service users shortly after
they have accessed services. This information will help identify short-comings in service quality
and crack-down on corruption where it is reported. Publication of feedback results will help
build trust with citizens and allow the authorities to take credit if service performance improves.
III.
PROJECT DESCRIPTION
27.
The project aims to increase efficiency of service delivery while preserving and
enhancing access to services for the poor and vulnerable.  The core focus of the project is
improving predictability and convenience and reducing the time taken to access administrative
services for all Albanian citizens. The means to this end are multi-pronged, including the
establishment of physical one-stop shops, citizen feedback mechanisms, provision of information
through multiple channels, and online provision of services. However, there is a risk that the
focus on state-of-the-art means for service delivery, such as online services or high-end urban
CSCs, will diminish access of the poor and vulnerable because of diversion of attention and
resources.  Therefore, the project takes pro-active steps to enhance the access to the poor and
vulnerable, including assisted digital access, improving existing service access points, and
providing information through non-digital means (see summary in Section VI/F, Table 3). The
project design attempts to balance between digital and non-digital means to manage the
inevitable trade-offs between quality and access.
A.
Project Components
28.
The project has three components.  Component 1 supports enhancements of the backend systems: business process reengineering of services, building new IT systems and
automation of services. Component 2 supports enhancements to the citizen interface with service
delivery: reforming front offices in existing agencies, improving citizen convenience with one
stop shops, improving online delivery of services, implementing beneficiary feedback, and
providing information on services. Component 3 builds capacity to deliver improvements in

services:  by improving strategic planning, performance management, capacity building of the
Prime Minister’s DU and the Ministry of Innovation and Public Administration (MIPA) and
other implementing agencies, and a communications strategy and campaign. A detailed
description of the components can be found in Annex 2.
29.
The three components each are supported by three parts of the loan.  These are:
Project Preparation Facility (PPF; US$2 million); a Results Based Financing part (RBF; US$25
million); and Technical Assistance part (TA; US$5 million) to build capacity of GoA in the areas
that are critical for implementing the program. The PPF and TA parts will follow the World
Bank procurement guidelines and disburse against eligible expenditures upon submission of
Interim Financial Reports (IFRs). The RBF will disburse against Eligible Expenditure Programs
(EEPs) upon achievement of the DLIs.  Table 1 depicts project components and associated
activities by financing instrument.
30.
Project Preparation Facility (US$2 million). This will finance consultants, goods,
training, and other inputs required to implement preparatory activities, such as support for
business process re-engineering, CSC building design, establishing the citizen feedback
mechanism, gathering baseline data for the PDO indicators, as well as building implementation
capacity of ADISA by establishing the Project Management Unit (PMU).
31.
Results Based Financing: Disbursement Linked Indicators (US$25 million). The
objective of the RBF is to provide incentives for undertaking critical reforms and achieving
results along the two result areas:  efficiency and access. Rather than financing inputs and
activities, this component disburses against agreed EEPs upon achievement of key results as
measured by the DLIs.  Five DLIs have been selected for providing incentives for and recording
progress toward creating higher quality and accessibility in delivering administrative services to
Albanian citizens. The majority of the loan (US$25 million) will disburse upon achievement of
agreed targets of the DLIs. Activities supporting the achievement these results include:
(a) Component 1: Back-end systems: Development of online services with level 3
automation (DLI#1); Re-engineering of administrative processes to reduce the time to
citizens of obtaining approvals (DLI#2);
(b) Component 2: Front office interface: Improved citizen interface for service provision
(DLI#3); improved provision of information on government services on multiple
platforms (DLI#4); and
(c) Component 3: Capacity to deliver: Institutional prerequisites of the reform process:
Policy Reform Document outlining strategic plan for the reform and PDO baseline
survey (DLI#5).  This is a “global” DLI, which means that no disbursements under
the RBF component will be made until DLI#5 is met.
32.
Technical assistance (US$5 million). This part of the loan will support capacity building
and institutional strengthening related to the achievement of key results. This is crucial because
the authorities do not have staff with the technical skills and experience needed to implement the
reform process. The modality for this component is traditional investment project financing (IPF)
where the government procures consultants, goods and other agreed inputs according to the
World Bank’s procurement rules. Areas for support by component include information and
communication technology (ICT) infrastructure, communication mechanisms and campaign, as
well as building capacity for performance management at the center of government.

Table 1.  Project Components by Financing Instrument

Component
PPF Activities
RBF support (DLIs)
TA Activities
Component
1.
Enhancing
Backend
Systems
Analysis of public services: identification
of areas for improvement and required
business process re-engineering.

DLI#1. Number of new services with level 3
automation
Measures
number
of
transactional
administrative services provided online with
two-way communication, including e-payment
and e-filing.

DLI#2. Number of  services with business
process reengineered
Measures the simplification and improvement
of business processes.

ICT infrastructure and strengthening ICT
capacity for digitization: strengthening
ICT capacity by providing ICT advisory
and technical support to ADISA and
NAIS in specialized areas such as
software
and
hardware
architecture,
database
optimization
and
software
development services, together with some
hardware and infrastructure;

Assistance with process reengineering
and capacity building activities for all
services to be included in the project, the
implementation
of
improvements
to
processes, and training and capacity
building activities for ADISA, officials
from related Ministries and Agencies, and
NAIS;
Component
2.
Enhancing
Citizen
Interface
Establishment of the Citizen Feedback
Mechanism
(CFM),
utilizing
textmessaging technology to capture feedback
on service delivery;
Design of the new CSC building, including
financing for a feasibility study, a
competition for the design and area master
plan;
Front office reform in selected service
delivery agencies;
Communication campaign, supporting the
campaign to spread the information about
the Public Sector Mall (CSC);
Baseline survey to determine service
quality and access.

DLI#3. Number of services offered with
improved front office interface
Measures the progress made by ADISA in
offering improved front office interface,
including offering services in the planned
Citizen Service Center (CSC).

DLI#4. Number of services with information
available on multiple platforms
Measures the increased availability and access
of information to the citizens.

Communication
programs
gathering
support from key stakeholders and align
incentives of various actors for successful
project implementation, together with
funding for designing and implementing
citizen
outreach
and
awareness
campaigns;
rolling
out
the
citizen
feedback mechanism.

Component
PPF Activities
RBF support (DLIs)
TA Activities
Component 3.  Building
Capacity to Deliver
Establishment of Project Management
Unit (PMU), including hiring consultants
with expertise in project management,
finance, administrative, and procurement
specialists and other project start-up costs

Supporting the work of the interministerial working group: building
coordination and communication capacity
among the agencies involved in business
process reengineering (BPR), and
facilitating change management

DLI#5. Institutional prerequisites of Citizen
Centric Service Delivery Program
This DLI requires that:
(a) Strategic
Plan
(Reform
Policy
Document) of the “Innovation against
Corruption” Program is approved by
the Strategic Planning Committee
chaired by Prime Minister;
(b) Baseline survey for PDO indicators is
conducted.
Change
management
and
outreach,
including design and implementation of a
change management program to inform
the design of the proposed reforms,

Strengthening project management and
data collection systems: setting up service
standards
and
conducting
regular
assessments; strengthening monitoring
tools; conducting third party audits and
verification of DLIs; and strengthening
project
management
and
fiduciary
capacity of the implementing agency
(ADISA); and

Building institutional capacity within the
center of government to oversee and
facilitate implementation of the reform:
institutionalization of the DU’s mandate
on in-depth performance monitoring and
facilitation of delivery improvements
(focused on priority areas identified by the
Council of Ministers). This includes high
level quality assurance of the operational
model established for the DU, just-in-time
assistance on specific areas of focus for
the DU, and capacity building for DU’s
staff.

B. Project Financing
33.
Loan amount, lending instrument and project duration. The proposed operation will
be financed by an IPF loan of US$32 million to the GoA and will use a results-based financing
modality to provide incentives for results. Credit proceeds will be disbursed to the GoA against
the execution of specific EEPs and the fulfillment of DLIs. The duration of this operation is five
years. Disbursement arrangements are detailed in Annex 3.
34.
Project funding. The EEPs for disbursements under the RBF part of the loan are salaries
and social security contributions of the five participating service delivery agencies. Project
funding under the PPF and TA parts of the loan will reimburse the GoA for the following
eligible expenditures: consultant services, goods, workshops and training, and other operating
costs. See Annex 3 for details.
35.
Project cost and financing.  Table 2a provides the breakdown of project cost by
financing instrument and IBRD and GoA contributions. Under RBF, the IBRD loan of US$25
million constitutes 38 percent of the total salary and wage bill of the participating agencies.
Table 2b details IBRD financing by component and loan instrument.

Table 2a. Project Cost and Financing inclusive of taxes (US$ million)

Financing Instrument
Project cost
IBRD Financing
%
Financing
Project Preparation Facility
Results-Based Financing
Technical Assistance
2.0
67.1
5.0
2.0
25.0
5.0
100%
38%
100%
Total Project Costs
74.1
32.0
43.2%

Table 2b. IBRD Financing by Component (million US$)
Component/Financing
Instrument
PPF
RBF
TA
Total
C1 Backend Systems
0.58
13.00
2.01
15.59

C2 Front Office
1.33
7.00
2.46
10.79

C3 Capacity to deliver
0.09
5.00
0.53
5.62

Total Bank Financing
2.00
25.00
5.00
32.00

C. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design
36.
The design of this operation draws upon and adapts the experiences from several
DLI based projects in the Governance Global Practice. These include projects in Pakistan and
India, as well as two recent DLI based projects in Albania in different sectors (social protection
and roads). Lessons learned during the preparation and implementation of these operations are
outlined below.
37.
Indicators have to designed in close coordination with the client if they are to be
clearly defined, realistic, measurable, and achievable within the reform efforts, but also
ambitious, in order to be transformative. The number of DLIs has been limited to five to keep
the government focused on the key priorities for the project while supporting the GoA on
refining its vision during project implementation, incorporating new technologies and expanding
the service delivery model to new areas within government. Verification protocols and
methodology have also been repeatedly discussed and designed as simple and clear as possible.
38.
TA is crucial to enhance program quality and facilitate achievements of results.  A
TA program has been designed in close coordination with the GoA for each component to
support achievement of DLIs and contribute to smooth project implementation. In particular, the
MIPA and ADISA both require significant capacity building in fiduciary and budget issues as
project implementers, which has been reflected in the design.
39.
E-governance reforms will fail if supporting reform elements are not addressed.
The need for “non-digital” reforms such as the business process re-engineering,  information
provision through traditional channels, assisted access of the poor and the vulnerable and
performance management at all layers of government are all addressed in the project to support
digital reforms.
IV.  IMPLEMENTATION
A.
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
40.
The Minister of Innovation and Public Administration will implement and monitor
the project. The Central Financing and Contracting Unit (CFCU) in the Ministry of Finance
(MoF) has been tasked as the PMU for the PPF because of its existing capacity and experience
with the Bank fiduciary processes. Going forward, the PMU will be established at the ADISA.
Annex 3 provides an organizational chart depicting reporting among various ministries and
agencies.
41.
The project will finance dedicated staff in the PMU to deal with the project’s
financial management, procurement, and administration.  Created in October 2014, ADISA
has a limited track record of implementation experience, but some members of the project team
have relevant experience. Incremental staff will support the financial management of the project
including fulfillment of financial reporting requirements.  In addition, there will be a budget
specialist that will prepare and facilitate budget requests from the MIPA to MoF.
42.
The Minister of State for Innovation and Public Administration chairs a Project
Steering Committee (SC). The SC oversees project management at the policy level. The SC
meets to provide guidance, identify problems and discuss corrective measures. The SC meets
weekly and includes the MIPA, office of the Deputy Prime Minister, the heads of the
Department of Development Programming, Financing and Assistance from Abroad and the DU

at the Prime Minister’s Office, NAIS, ADISA, and Project Director and thematic leaders.
Monthly meeting of the SC with the Deputy Prime Minister are anticipated.
43.
The Prime Minister chairs the Inter-ministerial Public Services Committee (IPSC)
that oversees the project at the strategic level.   This high level committee includes Ministers
that oversee all involved service provision agencies. It provides participating ministries and
agencies with strategic leadership and guidance. In addition, the Technical Inter-ministerial
Committee has been established to oversee the business process reengineering by the working
groups.  It is chaired by the Minister of Innovation and includes the heads of all participating
agencies (e.g. Immovable Property Registration Office, Social Insurance Institute, NAIS, and
General Directorate of Civil Status).
B.
 Results Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E)
44.
The project supports the DU in the Prime Minister’s office in setting up a strong
performance management system for the “Innovation against Corruption” program
through the citizen feedback mechanism. The PMU will be responsible for project monitoring
and evaluation activities and will report regularly to the DU. The results framework in Annex 1
summarizes the verification protocols for PDO and intermediate results indicators, as well as
DLIs. Where appropriate, third party validations will be deployed to verify DLI results and
assess performance of the intermediate results indicators. The M&E system will incorporate
mechanisms to monitor project implementation, compliance with the established procurement
and financial management procedures, and achievement of project performance indicators
included in Annex 1. Monitoring instruments include bi-annual progress reports on project
implementation, output and performance indicators, and targeted annual external assessment of
compliance with DLIs. Where relevant, gender disaggregated data will be collected including
from the proactive beneficiary feedback mechanisms. PDO indicators will be measured by the
service user survey for selected key services repeated every two years.
C.
Sustainability
45.
The Prime Minister and his Council of Ministers have declared this initiative one of
the GoA’s key priorities. The Deputy Prime Minister has chaired periodical meetings of the
project team.  The Minister of State for Innovation and Public Administrations has provided
hands-on leadership.  There is high level political commitment and push, which is a great asset to
the project. The compressed implementation timeline is a potential risk, which is mitigated by
the project’s span and incentives to deliver up to 2020.
46.
Insufficient institutional and implementation capacity of the Ministry of State for
Innovation itself has implications for project implementation and longer-term
sustainability. The creation of the new agency, ADISA, in October 2014 is a step in the
direction of strengthening the institutional capacity required for implementation.  ADISA reports
directly to the Minister of State for Innovation and Public Administration.  The recently amended
Council of Ministers Decision on ADISA (May 27, 2015) stipulates the Agency’s enhanced role
in the implementation of service delivery standards, including the administration of front offices
and the operation of the CSC. Contributing to sustainability, the project has a strong
communication component that will ensure that all stakeholders and citizens are informed about
the project progress and have a stake in its completion and delivering the results.

49.
Financial analysis of the project considers costs and benefits using a cash flow
approach. Financial benefits include: savings from the reduction of administrative costs of
providing the existing level of services stemming from digitization, automation, and business
process reengineering; an incremental increase in government revenue as a result of increased
volume of government services provided due to enhanced administrative efficiency of the
Government and improved access and reduced compliance cost for citizens.  Reduced
transaction cost for citizens may increase demand for such services, which may have budget
implications. While it is difficult to estimate the likely increase in demand, it could be significant
for some services, such as the health card.  Currently, the time required to collect the required
documentation to apply for the card deters a significant proportion of the population from
obtaining this card. A health card provides access to the government subsidized health care.
50.
There are significant upfront financial costs associated with the development of the
CSC, business process reengineering, digitization, automation, training staff and educating
citizens in the use of e-services. The operating costs for the CSC will likely be offset by lower
costs due to efficiency improvements following business process reengineering and
digitization.  Ongoing operating costs are expected to include licenses and system operation and
maintenance.  To continue efficiency improvements once services have been automated, the
Government will have to upgrade periodically. The cost of such upgrades should also be
appropriately factored in. It will also be important to ensure that staff with the relevant
capabilities to utilize and service the system are employed. Overall, these reforms are expected to
reposition the number of public sector employees engaged in front office work to ensure fulltime commitment in terms of customer service. Openings for higher skilled jobs, especially in
engaged in IT support and customer interface, are anticipated.
Economic Analysis
51.
Economic analysis of the project considers the direct benefits and costs associated
with changes in economic welfare arising from the project. The project is expected to
generate multiple economic benefits. Improved access to public services will lead to a reduction
in compliance costs for citizens, providing greater scope for citizens to engage in productive and
income generating activities.  The simplification and automation of government procedures,
improved customer orientation of existing public service windows, and the development of the
CSC will reduce time and travel costs for citizens, particularly for those living in remote areas
and from vulnerable groups.  Furthermore, focus group analysis conducted under the project as
well as a rapid analysis carried out by the Prime Minister’s DU show that about one third of
citizens come to government agencies to receive information only.
52.
Cost savings will be particularly significant for property registration services. The
2011 UNODC Corruption Survey indicates that property registration is one of the most affected
by bribery public services in Albania.  In addition, the results of the citizen feedback monitoring
program led by the Minister of State for Anti-Corruption point to instances of substantial delays
in issuing property registration documentation which go well beyond the statutory
deadlines.  That said, it is important to note that some of these delays result from lack of
effective record keeping and clarity regarding ownership and titles, which will not be improved
by this project.
53.
The benefits stemming from the reduction in compliance costs for citizens will be
significant. Time savings for citizens in obtaining services will allow them to engage in

productive and income generating activities. Assuming 380 services to be improved and a 25
percent time reduction, the net present value of these savings is USD 117.4 million in real terms
at 12 percent discount rate, based on the available data for 80.8 percent of target services. This is
a conservative estimate. The actual benefits associated with the lower compliance costs are likely
to be higher because travel time and travel cost are not taken into account due to the lack of data.
Key assumptions underpinning these estimates include: the benefits will accrue in the fifth year
of the project; citizens’ time to obtain public services comprises time to receive information
and/or an application, time to fill out and submit an application and all the required documents,
and time to follow up and obtain a final document/service; the number of users for each public
service remains constant; an estimated average monthly wage is Lek 41,963 in 2015 and is
converted into daily wage for the purpose of the analysis (22 working days per month); the
annual real growth rate for wages is 1.5 percent and remains constant; the exchange rate is
constant and equals to 130.65 Lek to USD as of April 2015. The time savings will be much
larger—USD 558.5 million at 12 percent discount rate—if the estimates cover a ten-year period.
The analysis is based on data provided by the DU in the Prime Minister’s Office.
54.
Economic cost will also fall as citizens will need to pay fewer fees to intermediary
agents and to other agents for supporting documentation.  The payment of bribes is expected
to decline because there will be the separation of the front office function and the back office
function in public service delivery and a gradual increase in the number of e-services available to
citizens.  The distorting impact of bribes causing a lower service use forms the real economic
cost (the value of the reduced services received by the citizenry relative to the economic cost of
the resources used to supply these services). Thus bribes forgone will represent a substantial
improvement to economic welfare of citizens.  Citizens will also benefit from improved
transparency and access to information for better decision making.
55.
At the same time, the project is likely to result in efficiency gains for the
Government. The simplification and automation of business procedures and the separation of
the front office function and the back office function in service delivery will also result in the
reduction of revenue leakages from fees for public services through fraud which have a distorting
effect on economic behaviour. Economic costs of the project will involve government staff time
spent on the implementation of the project and training and communication outreach undertaken
as part of the project.  However, the expected economic benefits are likely to significantly
outweigh economic costs of the project.
B.
Technical
56.
Design. The project focuses on the reform of service delivery, balancing non-digital
interventions with the ultimate goal of automation and online provision. The underlying premise
is that business process reengineering is central to any effort to improve service delivery and
must precede automation efforts that would result in online service provision. The project uses
communication to generate feedback on service delivery performance that can be used to guide
the design of fully automated e-services.
57.
Sequencing. The project aims to generate early wins (citizen feedback, performance
management) for the GoA while also supporting structural reforms (business process reform,
digitization and interoperability of databases, IT systems, CSC) that necessarily take more
investment and time. An appropriate balance between quick wins and long-term improvements
will ensure client’s interest, continued focus, and ultimate sustainability of the results.

58.
Just in Time TA. The Bank has provided just in time TA for several reform areas –
CFM, one stop shop (OSS) design, business process reform – to foster intensive dialogue with
the client, improve design, manage expectations, and help create early wins. This has also helped
create client trust and deepened the technical dialogue.
59.
Coordination. Inter-sectoral reforms, especially those that involve more than a dozen
government agencies, necessarily entail complex coordination. The Prime Minister’s office and
the DU will play an important role in managing this coordination. The DU will benefit from
technical assistance from the TA part of the loan.
60.
Communication.  Managing expectations, creating champions and early wins, and
energizing citizen coalition behind reforms is important to sustain change. The project supports
traditional approaches (provision of information on posters, fliers, and in brochures) and nontraditional (proactive citizen feedback via text messages) communication channels.
61.
Access for the rural population. The creation of a central CSC should go hand-in-hand
with improvements in services delivery to the rural population. The creation of alternative
channels for service delivery, including assisted internet access, is crucial for maximizing access.
The use of decentralized service delivery arrangements is intended to mitigate this risk. The
project will monitor the quality of access for the poor and the vulnerable to ensure that the
project actually delivers benefits to rural households.
C.
Financial Management
62.
The overall financial management risk is rated as Substantial. A preliminary
financial management assessment was performed to determine the financial management
implementation risk and to help establish adequate financial management arrangements for the
proposed operation.  The fiduciary responsibilities for the TA part of the loan will remain with
PMU that will be established in ADISA. Neither MIPA, nor the recently constituted ADISA
have previous experience in implementation of large donor funded operations, therefore capacity
strengthening would be recommended to ensure that the Project is implemented within a sound
fiduciary environment and meets the minimum requirements under OP 10.00. This includes: (i)
recruitment of two qualified finance specialists, that will be provided by the Project management
budget in component 3; (ii) periodic and on-the-job training of the financial management (FM)
staff during implementation in Bank financial management and disbursement procedures; (iii)
documentation of the financial management procedures, including internal controls in the
Financial Management Manual (FMM) that is the part of the Project Operational Manual (POM);
and (iv) purchase of an accounting software so that it is capable of generating IFRs and capture
accounts of the proposed project. The above actions will be addressed during the PPF period.
The fiduciary responsibilities for the PPF will be provided through the CFCU established under
MoF, until the ADISA/PMU is fully functional.
63.
The financial management arrangements for the RBF part are based on the country
systems and provide reasonable assurance on the use of credit proceeds for intended
purposes. The EEPs identified so far comprise expenditure programs in three budgetary
organizations and one public non-budgetary organization. With regard to EEPs, the proposed
project would rely on the government public financial management architecture for eligible
expenditure incurred in budgetary institutions and on the existing internal controls and financial
management arrangements for eligible expenditure related to the non-budgetary institutions. The

existing systems and arrangements perform with adequate levels of transparency and function
with an appropriate degree of controls.
64.
Disbursements. On the RBF part of the loan, the World Bank will reimburse the
Government, based on the submitted Eligible Expenditure Program (EEP) quarterly financial
reports (IFRs), for a share of EEPs upon the achievement and verification of results (DLIs).
Retroactive Financing of US$ 6.4 million is allowed for eligible expenditures starting January 1,
2015 for disbursement category 1, subject to achievement of associated DLI. Disbursements
under the PPF and TA parts of the loan will follow the more traditional financing mechanism
through documentation with Statements of Expenditures and Records and use of Designated
Accounts.  IFRs will be prepared on quarterly basis by the PMU (and by CFCU during the PPF
period). The IFRs for the RBF part of the loan will consolidate financial information from EEPs
budget execution reports generated from Treasury System for budgetary institutions, and EEPs
financial information prepared by non-budgetary institutions.
65.
Audits. The High State Control (Albania’s Supreme Audit Institution) will conduct an
annual financial audit of the EEPs and this audit will satisfy the World Bank’s audit requirement
for the RBF part of the loan. Additionally, the annual financial audit of the PPF and TA parts
will be executed as part of the global (country) audit contract that is annually tendered to a
private sector firm and which covers the entire World Bank’s investment lending portfolio in
Albania.
D. Procurement
66.
Procurement risk rating is High.  The CFCU in the MoF has been tasked as the PMU
for the Project Preparation Facility because of its existing capacity and experience with the Bank
fiduciary processes. The PMU will be comprised of the Project Manager, Financial Specialist,
Procurement Specialist, and Administrative Specialist.  Except for the Financial Specialist, PMU
staff are yet to be contracted due to the delay in the approval of the PPF.  The Project Manager
has been selected while the Procurement and Administrative Specialist positions have been readvertised. During project implementation, the same PMU will be transferred under the ADISA,
the project implementing agency.  Since ADISA is a newly-created agency and the PMU is not
yet fully set up, the procurement risk rating is high.
67.
Selection of consultants will be carried out in accordance with the World Bank's
Guidelines: Selection and Employment of Consultants under IBRD Loans & IDA Credits &
Grants by the World Bank Borrowers (revised July 2014).
68.
Procurement of goods and minor works will be carried out in accordance with the
World Bank’s Guidelines: Procurement of Goods, Works, and Non-Consulting Services under
IBRD Loans and IDA Credits & Grants by World Bank Borrowers (revised July 2014).  There
are only minor works under the project.
69.
The RBF portion of the proposed project (US$ 25 million) will only co-finance salaries
and social security contributions. It will not include any procurement activities.
E.
Environment (including Safeguards)
70.
Operational policy OP 4.01 is triggered and the project categorized as a World
Bank Category B because a new building will be constructed for CSC during Phase 2 of the
project. Although the project will not directly finance construction of the CSC in Tirana, the
World Bank safeguards policies will still apply to the actual construction activities of the Center.

The project will not directly finance the building, but will disburse upon fulfilling DLIs linked to
the provision of services in the one-stop shop.  Potential environmental impacts that are
associated with new construction include dust and noise, waste generation, material supply, use
of machinery on site, possible traffic and safety issues, land use, and other issues that should be
readily mitigated through sound construction practices and implementation of a project specific
Environmental Management Plan (EMP). Beyond the implementation of the EMP, the
construction of the new building will also be subject to the applicable Albanian laws on
construction and environmental permitting.
71.
In order to minimize and mitigate any potential negative environmental impacts, all
works need to be carried out in accordance with the EMP.  The EMP has been prepared in
line with the World Bank OP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment. The EMP will become an
integrated part of the bidding documents and the construction contract for the Citizen Service
Center. The EMP has been disclosed in country, with public consultations held on April 27,
2015. The final and revised EMP has been disclosed in country and through the World Bank’s
Infoshop on May 12, 2015.

F.
Social (including Safeguards)
72.
The project does not trigger OP/BP 4.12. The physical building for the CSC will be
constructed on the publically owned land. The land is not used for private or for public purposes.
73.
One of the contributions of the project is to ensure that the poor and vulnerable are
better served by the new systems.  The emphasis is on increasing access: not only constructing
the new one stop shop (CSC) in Tirana, but also improving the existing points of service access
and facilitating new ones.  One of the PDO indicators will track the access of the poor and
vulnerable. In addition, the citizen feedback mechanism for the selected services will be
established and the responses from all citizens will be disaggregated and controlled to distinguish
customers based on gender, income as well the remoteness from the regional center.  As the
overall focus of the project is improved citizen access to public services this issue will be
assessed in detail during the preparation stage and necessary strategies will be put in place as part
of the overall project design. The project is designed based on the guiding principles of
inclusiveness, transparency and accountability.
74.
A development plan for facilitated services to women, poor, ethnic Roma and other
marginalized groups will  be prepared as part of the project’s effort to facilitate access to
services among these groups and foster social inclusion. The Plan will draw on the project
interventions including assisted access to online services, non-digital means of accessing
information and services, and grassroots information and facilitation campaign targeting the
disadvantaged segments of the population.  Table 3 provides details.

Table 3. Project Interventions Targeting Disadvantaged Segments of the Population

Population
segment
Potential barriers to accessing services and providing
feedback on service quality
Project interventions addressing
the barriers
Barriers
Supporting data

Population
segment
Potential barriers to accessing services and providing
feedback on service quality
Project interventions addressing
the barriers
Barriers
Supporting data
Poor
Less access to information
due to lower skills and
economic participation

Lower use of IT for
accessing information and
providing feedback

Low-income population
pays more frequent bribes
than those with higher
income (UNODC 2011
survey).

Poor have average lower level
of education and  lower labor
market engagement: only
around 1 in 5 of poor people
(15+) are employed

Poor have lower access to
computers, internet and mobile
phones than non-poor (e.g. 12percentage point gap in internet
usage)
Targeted public information and
education campaign: customized
engagement of grassroots
organizations that work with
marginalized.  Spatial outreach.

The grassroots or community
organizations can facilitate access
to improved (online)
administrative services

Proactive feedback collection
targeted to the poor

Women
Less access to information
due to lower economic
participation

Lower use of IT for
accessing information and
providing feedback

Women in prime-age are
more exposed to corruption
than men (UNODC 2011
survey).

There is a 14-percentage point
gender gap in employment

Women have lower access to
computers, internet and mobile
phones than men (e.g. 7percentage point gap in internet
usage)
Public information and education
campaign using grassroots
organizations such as women’s
groups, especially for outreach to
rural women.

Proactive feedback collection
targeted to the women

Gender disaggregated data
collection for performance
management

Older
citizens
Less access to information
due to lower economic
participation

Lower use of IT for
accessing information and
providing feedback

Particularly salient for older
women: the gender
employment gap is the largest
for those 55-64 years

Computer usage and mobile
phone access varies strongly
with age (e.g. almost a 50percentage point gap in
computer usage between age
groups 15-24 and 45-64)
The program will improve current
network of administrative services,
through management by ADISA.
This segment of population will
likely prefer to use administrative
services in person. Employees to
be trained to service elderly.

Assisted access to online services

Targeting collection of proactive
feedback to the elderly

Call center access

Ethnic
minorities
Less access to information
due to lower skills and
Literacy rates are lower for the
Roma; unemployment rate is
The permanent public information
and education campaign will

Population
segment
Potential barriers to accessing services and providing
feedback on service quality
Project interventions addressing
the barriers
Barriers
Supporting data
(e.g.
Roma)
economic participation

Lower use of IT for
accessing information and
providing feedback

Low-income population
pays more frequent bribes
than those with higher
income.
higher for the Roma,
particularly for Roma women

Roma overrepresented among
the poor, which have lower
access to computers, internet
and mobile phones than nonpoor
include grassroots organization
that work with Roma.

Proactive feedback collection
targeted on the Roma

Call center helpline access
Rural
population
More difficult access to
services than in urban
areas.

Rural population is  more
exposed than the urban one
to petty corruption

Current network of service access
points will be improved.

Assisted access to online services

Targeting collection of proactive
feedback to the rural population

Call center helpline access

G.
World Bank Grievance Redress
75.      Communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely affected by a
World Bank (WB) supported project may submit complaints to existing project-level
grievance redress mechanisms or the WB’s Grievance Redress Service (GRS). The GRS
ensures that complaints received are promptly reviewed in order to address project-related
concerns. Project affected communities and individuals may submit their complaint to the WB’s
independent Inspection Panel which determines whether harm occurred, or could occur, as a
result of WB non-compliance with its policies and procedures. Complaints may be submitted at
any time after concerns have been brought directly to the World Bank's attention, and Bank
Management has been given an opportunity to respond. For information on how to submit
complaints to the World Bank’s corporate Grievance Redress Service (GRS), please visit
www.worldbank.org/grs. For information on how to submit complaints to the World Bank
Inspection Panel, please visit www.inspectionpanel.org.

Annex 1: Results Framework and Monitoring
ALBANIA:  Citizen Centric Service Delivery Project

PDO Statement

The development objective of the project is to improve efficiency of delivery and access to selected administrative services in Albania.
Project Development Objective Indicators1

Target Values

Data Source/
Responsibility
for
Indicator Name
Unit of
Measure
Baseline
FY 15-16 FY 16-17
FY 17-18
FY 18-19
FY 19-20
Frequency
Methodology
Data
Collection
Reduction in days taken to
obtain motor vehicle
registration
Percentage
31 days
-

-
24 months
Survey
PMU
Reduction in days taken to
process old age pension
application
Percentage
36 days
-

-
24 months
Survey
PMU

1 The Results Framework includes four interim PDO indicators, which will be revised, as needed, once the full baseline survey is completed as part of the global
DLI#5 (disbursement condition).  The interim baselines and targets for three PDO indicators (on efficiency of delivery) are based on the Prime Minister’s
Delivery Unit’s study of service delivery processes (2014).  With respect to the fourth PDO level indicator (on access), an existing Intermediate Results indicator
is used as an interim measure.  This allows all aspects of the PDO to be captured from the outset in a meaningful manner.  After the PDO baseline survey is
completed, the PDO will track all four PDO indicators by income group and gender (% women). The expected timeframe for completion of the survey is prior to
project effectiveness.

Reduction in days  taken to
obtain health insurance card
Percentage
9 days
-

-
24 months
Survey
PMU
Increased access to services
of the vulnerable and the
poor
Number

-
70 services
with
information
available on
multiple
platforms

-
130 services
with
information
available on
multiple
platforms
24 months
Survey
PMU

Intermediate Results Indicators

Target Values

Data Source/ Responsibility for

Indicator Name
Unit of
Measure
Baseline
FY 15-16
FY 16-17
FY 17-18
FY 18-19
FY 19-20
Frequency
Methodology Data Collection
Enhancing the Backend Systems
Agencies with new and enhanced
IT systems
Number
-
-
Annual
Third party
report
PMU
Number of priority public
services with business process
reengineered  (DLI)
Number
BPR To-Be
maps of 50
services
produced and
approved
BPR To-Be
maps of 70
services
produced and
approved
BPR plans for
70 services
executed
BPR To-Be
maps of 100
services
produced
-
Annual
Third party
reports/admin
istrative data
PMU
Number of new online services
with Level 3  automation (DLI)
Number
-
Annual
Third party
report
PMU
Enhancing Citizen Interface
Number of services offered with
improved customer service/front
office interface (DLI)
Number
Annual
ADISA
PMU
Services with information
available on multiple platforms
(DLI)
Number
70 services;
promotion plan
70 services;
promotion plan
Annual
PMU reports  PMU

Intermediate Results Indicators

Target Values

Data Source/ Responsibility for

Indicator Name
Unit of
Measure
Baseline
FY 15-16
FY 16-17
FY 17-18
FY 18-19
FY 19-20
Frequency
Methodology Data Collection
prepared
executed and
third party
review
conducted
Functional outreach points for
assisted access with online
service delivery
Number
-
Annual
PMU reports  PMU
Users accessing e-government
services
Number
50 000
55,000
60,500
66,550
73,205
80,525
Quarterly
NAIS reports  PMU
Number of services with
proactive citizen feedback
mechanisms implemented.
Number
Bi-annual
DU reports
PMU
Building Capacity to Deliver
Institutional pre-requisites of
Citizen Centric Service Delivery
Program (DLI)
Process
Prerequisite
s not
completed
Reform Policy
Document
approved; PDO
indicator survey
completed
n/a
n/a
n/a
n/a
Unique
Government
documents.
PMU
Services with key performance
indicators reported and quarterly
performance reports circulated
Number
Zero
Annual
Government
documents
DU
Annual performance report of
each key service/agency with
KPIs, gender disaggregated
wherever relevant, and feedback
on quality prepared and
published.
Number
Zero
Annual
Government
report
ADISA

.
Project Development Objective Indicators
Indicator Name
Description (indicator definition etc.)
Reduction in days taken to obtain motor vehicle registration
The indicator measures reduction in processing time of the most widely used and widely
criticized service of the General Directorate of Roads and Transport Services.
Reduction in days taken to process old age pension application
The indicator measures reduction in processing time of the most widely used and the most
challenging service of the Social Security Institute.
Reduction in days  taken to obtain health insurance booklet
The indicator measures reduction in processing time of the most widely used service of the
Compulsory Health Insurance Fund.
Increased access of the vulnerable and the poor
Measures the increased availability and access of information to the citizens. Multiple
platforms include but are not limited to web, mobile apps, web-available pdf, SMS,
helplines, print material such as poster, brochures etc.

Intermediate Results Indicators (including DLIs)
Indicator Name
Description (indicator definition etc.)
Agencies with new and enhanced IT systems
Measures the implementation and functionality of document management, workflow and
decision making IT systems in the agencies specified in the Operations Manual.
Services with business process reengineered  (DLI)
Measures the simplification and improvement of business processes.
Services  with level 3  automation (DLI)
Number of services with transactional web presence, including electronic authentication, efiling and e-payments, as defined in UN E-Government definition (2014).
Services offered with improved front office interface (DLI)
Measures incremental improvement in service culture for increased citizen convenience and
reduced petty corruption. Improved front office means front office managed by ADISA
(including CSC) and may include directly managed front office or through public private
partnerships.

Services with information available on multiple platforms  (DLI)
Measures the increased availability and access of information to the citizens. Multiple
platforms include but are not limited to web, mobile apps, web-available pdf, SMS,
helplines, print material such as poster, brochures etc.

Functional outreach points for assisted access with online service delivery
Measures the number of points that provide assisted access to the online services with a
focus on the rural population, elderly and minorities.
Users accessing E-Government services
Based on the EU DESI identification of E-Government indicator 5a1, this indicator
measures the number of users filing forms on the net.
Number of services with proactive citizen feedback mechanisms implemented
Measures the permanent proactive conduct of surveys, through use of SMS, automated call,
and agent calls of identified beneficiaries, on sample or universal basis, to assess the quality
of service delivery for performance management, Individual negative feedback may be
redressed, but it is not a complaint receipt or management system.
Institutional pre-requisites of Citizen Centric Service Delivery Program (DLI)
Measures the ownership of financing, stakeholder management, strategic design details, and
regulatory reform of the reform process, as well as assessing baselines for quality and
access of service delivery
Services with key performance indicators reported and quarterly  performance reports
circulated
Measures the use of date collection for improved performance management.
Annual performance report of each key service/agency with KPIs, gender disaggregated
wherever relevant, and feedback on quality prepared and   published.
Measures the use of date collection for improved performance management.

#
 DLI
Verification Protocol

Services with level 3 automation
Services with transactional web presence, including electronic authentication, e-filing
and e-payments. Level 3 automation is defined by the UN e-Government Survey (2014):
http://unpan3.un.org/egovkb/Portals/egovkb/Documents/un/2014-Survey/EGov_Complete_Survey-2014.pdf.  Compliance will be assessed by third party
validation.

Services with business process reengineered
Third party validation (TPV) based on government documents and processes, review of
citizen feedback data, surveys, and focus groups.
Key services are identified in the operations manual.
Execution of BPR means legal, institutional, and process improvements and may not
include IT improvements.
Approved means approval by the Interministerial Public Services Committee.
The approved plan may be reviewed/amended subsequently by said Committee.

Services offered with improved front office interface
Third party validation (TPV) based on field visits and review of citizen feedback data,
survey reports and focus groups based on a sample agreed with the Bank.
Front office means front office managed by ADISA and may include directly managed
front office or through public private partnerships.

Services with information available on multiple platforms
Multiple platforms include web, mobile apps, pdf, sms, helplines, print material such as
poster, brochures etc.
Third party (TPV) will review the quality, user friendliness and accuracy of information
availability for a sample of services based on the process agreed with the Bank.
Promotion plan must be approved by the Steering Committee.
The number is cumulative.
Availability of information for its quality and accuracy will be measured for every year
separately.

Institutional pre-requisites of Citizen Centric Service Delivery Program
This DLI requires that:
(a)
Strategic Plan (Reform Policy Document) of the “Innovation against
Corruption” Program is approved by the Strategic Planning Committee chaired by Prime
Minister;
(b)
Baseline survey for PDO indicators is conducted.

Annex 2:  Detailed Project Description
ALBANIA: Citizen Centric Service Delivery Project

Background
1.
Delivery of administrative services in Albania, despite substantial improvements
over the last decade, remains short of European standards. A March 2015 DU report
prepared for the Prime Minister highlights that only 56 percent of the 134 public sector
institutions that directly interact with citizens maintain some kind of service delivery desks. Only
8 percent of these could be considered as genuine service desks with queue management. Of the
250 citizens receiving services at various institutions surveyed, a quarter had to wait for more
than 30 minutes at the service desk before being served. The service desks functioned only for a
couple of hours each day, at uneven times. The level of citizen demand and allocation of
resources (service desk, waiting space) were inconsistent. Citizens complained about surly
attitude of the staff. About one third of citizens were visiting only to receive information.
Advertised office telephone numbers did not respond, information at the center was scarce and
the information receptionist was often absent.
2.
In addition to inconvenience and unpredictability, perceptions of corruption in
service delivery remain high. According to a 2011 survey by the United Nations Office of
Drugs and Crimes (UNODC), corruption, after unemployment, was seen to be the second biggest
issue of the citizens. Some 30 percent of Albanian citizens, aged 18 to 64, have been exposed
directly or through a household member to a bribery experience within the 12 months of the
conduct of the survey. The bribes, mostly in cash, averaged around 43 Euros. Some 70 percent of
Albanian reported paying bribes to doctors, another 7 percent to land registry officers. Rural
citizens and women suffer disproportionately more. Not all bribes are directly coerced. Some 30
percent of citizens initiate the payment. Some 70 percent of citizens who bribe do so to receive
better treatment and another 9 percent to speed up the procedure. Only 1 percent of those
experiencing bribery actually report to authorities. Some 45 percent of citizens think that bribery
is too common a practice to merit reporting to higher officials.
3.
The existing service delivery apparatus is large in spread where more than a million
citizens interact every year with various service delivery access points. Director General for
Civil Status operates 432 branches across the country. The Director General of Taxes, General
Directorate of Road Transport Service, Immovable Properties Registration Office, Compulsory
Health Insurance Fund, The National Employment Service, National Registration Center, and
Social Insurance Institute operate around 35 each.
4.
Elected on an anti-corruption platform, the Government of Albania (GoA) aims to
rapidly improve citizen services.  Specific objectives include reducing the time of service
delivery both for citizens and the government, reducing scope for corruption, implementing
modern service delivery, and adopting citizen focused ethics for provision of public services.
5.
The project focuses on improving predictability and convenience and reducing the
time taken to access administrative services for all Albanian citizens. The means to this end
are multi-pronged, including the establishment of physical one-stop shops, citizen feedback
mechanisms, provision of information through multiple channels, and online provision of
services.

6.
Access to services is unequal in Albania, with the poor and vulnerable being least
served.  Box A2-1 describes the barriers to access to services and information for the vulnerable
groups in Albania.  There is a risk that the focus on state-of-the-art means for service delivery,
such as online services or high-end urban CSCs, could diminish access of the poor and
vulnerable because of diversion of attention and resources. Therefore, the project takes proactive steps to enhance the access to the poor and vulnerable.  Specific interventions include
assisted digital access, improving existing service access points, targeted information campaigns
using grassroots organizations and providing information through non-digital means. The project
design attempts to balance between digital and non-digital means to manage the inevitable tradeoffs between quality and access.

Box A2-1. The poor and vulnerable in Albania: Barriers to access to services

The profile of the poor and the bottom 40 percent of population shows disparities across groups and along
several dimensions. The poor and bottom 40 percent have lower educational attainment; for instance, poverty is
higher – at 15 percent – in households in which individuals have incomplete primary education (capturing around 66
percent of the total poor). Labor market attachment of the poor and bottom 40 percent is also low and poverty is
closely correlated with employment status. In 2012, the incidence of poverty was 11 percent among households
headed by employed persons, compared to 22 and 24 percent among households headed by unemployed or inactive
persons.

Beyond the less well-off - poor and bottom 40 percent - some population groups face gaps in accessing
opportunities. Women, for instance, have lower labor force participation and lower wages than men, as well as
lower access to productive inputs such as land and credit (see SCD). The Roma population in Albania faces
significant challenges. Poverty rates are high among the Roma population, and deprivations more severe. Education
and health outcomes, as well as labor market engagement are lower with a 30 percentage point gap in literacy rate
between the Roma and non-Roma neighbors (UNDP/EC/WB Regional Roma Survey, 2011).

Inequalities in access to services exist in Albania. Access to basic services such as water, sanitation, education and
health is lower among the less well-off (see SCD 2015). The Roma population also has relatively lower access to
basic social services: for example, the share of the Roma population without access to improved water sources (i.e.
piped water in dwelling) is 30 percent, compared to 18 percent in neighboring non-Roma households.

In addition, access to information and specific services could be limited by the lower usage of computers,
internet and mobiles phones among the less well-off, women and older population. A recent WB analysis of the
2012 LSMS survey shows that computer usage and mobile phone access varies strongly with age, with lower access
for older groups. For example, while 21 percent of women 25-44 years reported using a computer in the three
months preceding the survey, 6 percent reported doing so among women 45-64 years; overall access for men is
higher but the age gap persists (27 percent for men 25-44 years, compared to 11 percent for men 45-64). In the same
way, only 12 percent of poor men reported using the internet in the past three months (9 percent for poor women),
compared to 28 percent for the non-poor males (21 percent for women); similar gaps between the bottom 40 percent
and top 60 percent exist. Data for the Roma population is not available, but large gaps are expected compared to the
non-Roma given their overrepresentation among the poor.

Access to mobile phones is significantly higher in Albania than to computers, but gaps are present for the less
well-off and women. 45 percent of women are primary users of mobile phones, compared to 67 percent of men.
Similarly, along the socio-economic dimension, 28 and 51 percent of poor women and men, respectively, use mobile
phones, while 48 percent and 70 percent of the non-poor do so. Inequalities along the age and ethnic dimension are
also expected.

Project Description
7.
The project aims to improve the quality and access of targeted administrative
services through interventions in three components. These components are: (i) enhancing the
back-end systems  (enhancing IT systems of key agencies, business process reengineering of
services, implementing overall improvements in interactivity, facilitation of transaction and
integration of key services); and (ii) enhancing citizen interface with service delivery (reforming
front offices in existing agencies, improving citizen convenience with one stop shops, improving
online delivery of services, implementing proactive beneficiary feedback, providing information
on services); and (iii) building capacity to deliver (improving strategic planning, performance
management, capacity building of the Prime Minister’s DU and the MIPA and other
implementing agencies, including ADISA, NAIS as well as DAETIK (ICT European Digital
Agenda Agency) and AKCE (National Authority for Electronic Certification) both under MIPA,
and implementing the reform communications strategy).
8.
The project focuses on widely used administrative services.  Annex A2-1 includes the
list of over 160 priority services that GoA plans to focus on for various project interventions.
Component 1. Enhancing the Back-end Systems
9.
Radical improvements in service delivery are predicated on several back-end
systems. These include improving organizational IT system and building applications for
improved integration and citizen access. The legacy  registers of various agencies have to be
digitized, made interoperable, processes built for their continuous automation, and systems
integrated for data exchange; the regulatory processes underpinning the services also need to be
carefully reviewed to ensure that that duplication is avoided, undue processes and permission
removed, and discretion and human interaction reduced. The first component will focus on these
activities.  The net result will increase in the number of services that are offered online for
interactivity (level 2 of e-governance according the UN definition), paperless transaction at the
citizen end (e-filing, e-payment, and related citizen authentication; level 3), and full paperless
decision making (all relevant databases are integrated and decisions are made online; level 4).
Enhancing IT Systems
10.
Seven institutions encompassed by the proposed project have no IT system in place.
Entire business processes are performed manually and the data registers are kept in paper form.
GoA plans to build new IT systems for the following institutions: General Directorate of Prisons,
Central Technical Archive of Construction, General Maritime Directorate, student registration in
kindergartens and schools, and others. The process of building a new IT system for those
institutions will be carried out in phases. The new IT systems will aim to improve the data and
document management, workflow systems, and decision making. Such systems will be defined
to meet the specific technical and operational requirements of the respective institutions.
11.
A key aspect of improving IT systems is improving inter-operability of electronic
registers. In addition, the project will ensure data validity and interoperability (addition of
National ID numbers, for example) and implement measures to ensure back end data exchange to
improve speed and accuracy for service delivery. NAIS is working to connect existing online
registries to the government gateway interoperability platform. Currently, 21 institutions are
connected to the platform, with an additional 11 institutions to be connected in 2015.

12.
The level of digitization of legacy registers and their presumption of authenticity
and interoperability differs substantially among different institutions:
a.
National Civil Registry (NCR) has been created in accordance with best European
practices. Digitization of about 4.3 million records of the Civil Registry from
2008 is complete and scanning of the earlier archive of paper registers is
underway utilizing internal resources.
b.
Social Security Institute (SII) manages several databases including number of
years of work for former agricultural cooperatives and state-owned enterprises;
pension registers, register of the self-employed in agriculture, voluntary
contributions and employee salary and withholdings declarations by employers.
Some registers documenting the number of years of work dating before 1994 are
in paper. The rest are digitized. E-pension is currently deployed fully in two cities
(Vlora and Fier) and partly in additional five of them (Tirana, Durres, Shkodra,
Korça and Lushnja). In other regions, registers are partially electronic. The
registers of the self-employed, on the other hand, are mostly in paper format.
c.
Health Insurance Institute (HII) is fully digitized and work is underway to
complete interoperability with tax and civil registry.
d.
Immovable Property Registration Office (IPRO) provides web services to other
systems for data on properties. The National ID number is missing for most
records, only 45 to 50 percent of the archive is digitized, and legal issues over
ownership remain for much of the digitized record.
e.
National Registration Center (NRC) provides information on businesses and
shareholders but it lacks ID number of individuals.
f.
National Licensing Center (NLC) provides information through web Services for
cases and information from the register of licenses.
g.
General Directorate of Road Transport Services (GDRTS) provides information
through the web on drivers' licenses and from the register of vehicle registration.
Not all ID numbers are recorded.

Reengineering Business Processes
13.
Albanian ministries continue to use antiquated processes for receiving and
processing applications for government services. These systems and processes are slow,
inflexible, opaque and prone to corruption.  The progressive modernization of the delivery of
government services can increase trust between citizens and government, improve the efficiency,
effectiveness, transparency and accessibility of government services – including reducing the
time incurred by citizens in accessing government services.  This includes reform and process reengineering of approval processes for access to services provided by ten key government
agencies.
14.
The Minister for Innovation chairs the Technical Inter-ministerial Working Group
established to oversee the regulatory reform and business process reengineering by the
working groups.  It includes the heads of all participating agencies. In addition, ministerial and
agency Working Groups (WGs) have been established that will review whether licenses, permits
and approvals are justified, validate existing legal inventory and process maps and develop plans
for re-engineering access to core government services. The WGs were formally established in
early 2015.

15.
The DU within the Prime Minister’s Office prepared Terms of Reference and
additional support and guidance for the ministerial WGs. The ToR include guidance
regarding the role and composition of each WG, services that need to be reviewed, and the
methodology to be applied to the regulatory reform and process re-engineering. Where approval
for services involves two or more ministries, representatives of relevant ministries will
participate in the WG reviewing that service. All WGs will also have a representative from
MIPA, NAIS, and ADISA, and process-re-engineering and regulatory reform experts.
16.
The ToR include the objective of reductions in the time needed to obtain approval to
access administrative services and increase in efficiency. The ToR require WGs to review
existing licenses, permits and approvals to ascertain if they are still required and justified.
Licenses, permits and approvals that are no longer justified – on the basis that they have no clear
rationale or generate net costs – will be eliminated. Those that have a clear rationale and generate
net benefits will be retained but will be subject to process re-engineering to reduce the time
required to obtain relevant approvals.  The ToR also include guidance on timelines and processes
to monitor the impacts of the reform program.
17.
Guidance notes have also been prepared to guide the work of ministerial WGs. The
Guidance notes are tailored to the objectives and capacities of the ministerial WGs and provide
implementation support on core activities needed to launch a successful process re-engineering
and regulatory reform review process. The guidance notes include templates for: preparing
process maps and legal inventory for existing services; documenting IT systems currently used;
budgeting costs of providing approvals to access existing government services; collecting
baseline data on how much time is currently incurred by citizens applying for government
services; and estimating budget costs to implement re-engineering; and monitoring and
evaluation systems.
18.
In April-May 2015 a fast-track pilot of two services was undertaken. This pilot
included: preparation of process maps and legal inventory for two pilot services; preparation of
proposals via new process maps and legal reform inventory for revised and re-engineered
services (by leveraging off IT systems, modifying eligibility for a service (by changing document
requirements) and modernizing how applications are processed and approved internally; and
undertaking of a survey of current users of these services (i.e., citizens) and analysis of the time
and cost incurred through internal ministerial processing of applications from citizens. The
results of this pilot will be reviewed by the high level Ministerial Working Group and ‘fine
tuning’ amendments will be made to the ToR and Guidance notes.
19.
The process re-engineering and regulatory reform component will be implemented
in a sequential manner. Phase 1 from June 2014 to October 2015 will include identification of
reforms required to each government service. Legal changes required to implement
recommended reforms are expected to be completed within 2016. Reform of government
services and repeal of licenses, permits and approvals will be implemented through Omnibus
legislation listing all legal amendments to various Primary Acts required to implement the
reform program.
20.
Once primary legislation is approved by the Parliament, changes will be made to
regulations, by-laws and by administrative decisions. The Omnibus legislation is to be
implemented by end of 2016, during phase 2 which takes place from October 2015 to April
2017.

21.
The project will support the reengineering of the business process of key services,
the approval of the reform plan by the Council of Minister and its implementation. This
will be supported both by incentivizing the process by linking it to disbursements through the
DLI on BPR as well as through the technical assistance.
Component 2. Enhancing Citizen Interface with Service Delivery
22.
Key interventions under this component include: improving physical interface with
citizens; enhancing online delivery of services, improving provision of information on services,
implementing citizen feedback mechanisms, and providing assisted access to the poor and the
vulnerable and rural citizens.
Improving physical interface with citizens
23.
The Citizen Service Center model of service delivery has been implemented in a
number of countries in the ECA region and beyond. Albania’s authorities have learned from
several of these models (specifically Georgia, Azerbaijan and Estonia) that may be applicable
and implementable in Albania. These models have been shown to achieve similar aims:
reducing petty corruption and informal payments; increasing citizen satisfaction; reducing
administrative burden for the citizens; and – when paired with process re-engineering –
increasing the efficiency and effectiveness of service delivery.
24.
The Government of Albania already has demonstrated experience in the
development and management of sector-specific One Stop Shops. Under the Ministry of
Economy with USAID support, the National Registration Center (NRC) and National Licensing
Center (NLC) have launched CSCs for the registration of businesses and licensing, respectively.
This model also incorporates 33 regional hubs which are joint locations where the NRC and
NLC service clients under the same roof.  It is envisaged that these two bodies will be merged
and then integrated with the CSC one-stop shop.
25.
The Agency for Delivery of Integrated Service in Albania (ADISA), created by the
Council of Ministers Decision of 10/22/2014, and provided with an enhanced mandate by
the CoM Decision of 05/27/2015, is a key beneficiary and implementer of the reform.
ADISA reports to the Minister for Innovation. An Inter-Ministerial Working Group, chaired by
the Prime Minister provides strategic leadership to this reform. The separation of front and back
offices has the potential to reduce opportunities for gatekeeping, petty corruption and limit
administrative discretion. Feedback mechanisms for monitoring service delivery will allow the
government to measure the impact of the CSC on the citizen and the impact of regulatory and
process re-engineering on the efficiency of services. Finally, ADISA will also offer application
forms and information regarding all services offered by the Government of Albania.
26.
Currently, government is discussing various options for improving the physical
interface with citizens. These include retaining the existing service delivery points but replacing
the current staff by ADISA managed and trained staff; opening model centers that provide
several front end services; and using the existing concession granted to the service provider for
passports.
27.
In parallel, the Government of Albania intends to construct a central CSC building
in Tirana. This facility will offer citizens and businesses physical access to over 300

administrative services. Although the National Agency for Information Service (NAIS) is
working to automate services for online provision, there will be a need for a physical presence
where citizens can access services in person for the foreseeable future, not least owing to the low
level of internet penetration, with only 60 internet users per 100 people in 2013.  Moreover, the
GoA values the symbolic significance of a new building, highlighting a new citizen-focused
approach to government service delivery. The core features and size of this new building have
not yet been decided. Various models for financing, construction and management, including
PPPs, are under consideration.
28.
The project will support the creation of a new improved citizen interface managed
by ADISA. The number of services offered with a new interface is linked to disbursements
(DLI), and TA activities are planned as well.  Improvement of the interface could be achieved
through the reform of front office in the existing agencies, public private partnerships, replacing
interface with an ADISA managed layer of staff, or through the CSC directly managed by
ADISA.
Improving Online Delivery of Services
29.
Several major e-governance efforts in Albania have attempted to improve public
service delivery.  The e-Albania portal (www.e-albania.al) offers over 500 services as of June
2015 (see Annex A2.2 for details). E-Governance efforts also include: online procurement;
digitization of twenty percent of property records; several municipal services one-stop shops;
modernized business registration and licensing services; digitization of passport and national
identification number.  Albania ranks “high.” In the United Nations E-Government Development
Index 2014.
30.
The National Agency for Information Society (NAIS) is the principal agency tasked
with the implementation of ICT strategies in government and the coordination and
promotion of E-Government across the public sector. NAIS is implementing projects to
update the portal, implement government public keys, create a mobile-friendly version of the
portal, create mobile applications and implement electronic payment modules. By the Council of
Ministers’ Decision no. 961, dated November 24, 2010, NAIS is the coordinating and regulatory
authority (CRA) for state databases. NAIS as CRA is responsible for the Government
Interoperability Platform, which means that it develops and coordinates access to this platform to
ensure the interoperability of databases of all government agencies.
31.
The most advanced areas in terms of one-stop-shop and online service provision are
business licensing and registration. The Ministry of Economy, Trade, and Energy created the
National Registration Center (NRC) in 2007 and the National Licensing Center (NLC) in 2009 to
facilitate business transactions. The NRC registers businesses of all types, substituting the courts.
Once a business registers, it is also immediately registered at the national and local tax
administration offices, social security, health insurance, and Labor inspectorate. The center
maintains the national commercial register – a digitized database to host all information
regarding businesses, which is also available online. The service windows for the NRC are
located in 28 cities across the country.
32.
After streamlining licensing requirements from 200 to 65 categories and
subcategories, the NLC created service windows to manage licensing and permitting
procedures. The NLC also maintains the National Registry of Licenses and Permits, which is
accessible online. At present, the Government is working on the establishment of a “Business

One Stop Shop” (BOSS) that would bring together 10 high-level business processes generally
part of a business’s lifecycle.
33.
There are a number of other services available through the e-Albania platform.
These include State Matura (for student entrance exams). Through this system all student
applications are submitted online, though payment is still done off-line. NAIS also developed the
Tracking Project, a service that enables each citizen or business who applies to a State office, to
follow the progress of their application online in the interim period until an official response is
received. Up to now there are three state agencies that have implemented this service: the Public
Procurement Agency, the National Registration Center and the National Licensing Center.
34.
Legal reforms to define and consolidate the role of NAIS and to implement the Esignature infrastructure are underway. This will facilitate the provision of public service
transactions online. NAIS also aims to launch publicity campaigns to attract more citizens to use
the E-Albania portal. Currently, the bulk of visitors relate to the state examination results.
35.
These reforms will contribute to the long term goal of providing maximum services
through an online platform. As government reforms the regulatory processes, digitizes and
makes interoperable core registers and facilitate online payments and signatures, the number of
services offering information, interaction and transaction will increase substantially to enable
Albania to move towards the goal of all services delivered online. The project will measure
progress EU-compliant indicators of website usage and interaction indicators.  The project will
directly support these activities through the TA part of the loan.

Providing Information on Key Services
36.
The e-Albania portal provides information on the administrative processes (i.e.,
documents required, time taken, payments needed) on a wider range of services; however,
the use of this facility is limited. Some 50 percent of citizens approaching the property
registration center, according the director of a regional center, just came to seek information. A
recent ADISA survey of some 250 citizens physically accessing services at various service
delivery points also found that some one third of them were standing in the queue just to seek
information. Information posters, if present, were hidden from clear view. Information desks
were empty and telephone numbers went unattended.
37.
The key lesson is that passively placing information on the website is not enough. A
substantial majority of the Albanian population, especially the elderly and rural citizens, are
likely to use the traditional mechanisms to access information. Information therefore has to be
actively distributed though the range of available traditional channels. These include brochures
and posters at the facilities and more inventive mechanisms like outsourced helplines. The
availability of this information on various channels has to be aggressively promoted.
38.
The project will monitor progress on the provision of accurate information on
multiple channels. This will include information on administrative processes (location of
service delivery, documents required, grievance redress mechanism, cost, timing) of various
services and promoted through helplines, posters, brochures, fliers, PDFs, SMS, outdoor
advertising,

Implementing Beneficiary Feedback
39.
A citizen feedback mechanism will be rolled out under the project. Leveraging the
extremely high mobile penetration, this intervention, unlike a classic complaints mechanism,
records citizen cell numbers at the point of service delivery to be followed by text messages by
the government to the citizens asking about the quality of services received. The proactive nature
of the contact also helps communicate to the citizen that the state cares thus helping to reduce
citizen-state trust deficit and fight perception of poor service delivery.2 The telecom density in
Albania is close to universal, with all urban and rural areas fully covered.
40.
The GoA is currently piloting CFM on two services: hospital services and property
registration.  After extensive work building software systems, negotiating contracts with the
telecom vendors and tweaking existing data entry mechanisms, the office of the Minister of AntiCorruption has launched, in early March 2015, the proactive collection of citizen feedback in
property registration and hospital care across Albania. More than 20,000 citizens (approximately
1,000 every day) have been contacted on behalf of the Minister; approximately 20 percent
citizens have responded. Many have recorded appreciation for this proactive contact. Several
have registered their dissatisfaction with service delivery, especially the multiple visits and the
delays in the property registration office. Some have reported bribery. The Prime Minister and
other Ministers have reviewed the progress and have ordered it gradual introduction to other
ministries.
41.
Currently, plans are underway to improve the analysis capacity for the large
amounts of incoming data.  Furthermore, the GoA plans to expand the scope to other services,
including to the citizens who will interact with improved facilitation interface in one-stop shops,
implement plans to communicate this effort to the citizens and improve the usage of this data for
performance management. (The negative feedback is anonymized and passed on to the relevant
government facility).
42.
A sample of citizens will be regularly contacted by phone for detailed feedback on
quality of services, with focus on the poor and the vulnerable. The calls will especially target
women, elderly, rural citizens and minorities, to ask questions on access barriers to services,
various quality metrics and then inform the senior leadership about the impact on service
delivery.
43.
The DU is well placed to analyze the feedback and drive internal accountability
based on the patterns of feedback received. This permanent survey, conducted on universal or
sample basis, will help audit the administrative data, communicate government intentions to a
large number of citizens, seek citizen support for the reform effort and help check quality of
service delivery.
44.
It is also important to use additional mobile communication approaches, such as
pushing SMS messages to the citizens to communicate timelines/dates of receipt,
processing, completion and delivery of documents.  This will also help increase citizen
confidence and trust in government responsiveness. Given the low level of internet connectivity
and access of large segments of the beneficiary population, the existing e-tracking facility
offered for some services needs to be supplemented with the proposed proactive tracking

2 Logged On: Smart Government Solutions from South Asia, Bhatti, Kusek and Verheijen, (World Bank, 2015).

communication.  The project supports this initiative with TA and will measure the number of
services where the proactive citizen feedback is collected and performance reports generated for
senior leadership as well as field managers. ADISA will also use this mechanism to measure
quality of delivery at the proposed CSC and manage performance of field managers.

Box A2-2. Citizen Feedback Mechanism in Albania
The citizen feedback monitoring program model helps senior management in the government make better-informed
decisions by providing them with granular, transaction-specific, time-bound, context-defined, and quantitative
performance management data. A standard practice in the private sector in many parts of the world, this proactive
feedback mechanism is distinct from the standard reactive complaint systems that focus only on the negative issues.
Such proactive gathering of feedback utilizes basic text messaging technology and leverages the ubiquity of basic
cell phones.  Service users’ mobile numbers are recorded at the point of service delivery and followed up with a text
message from the Government asking about the details of the quality of service.
The model emphasizes trend analysis of the feedback as opposed to addressing individual complaints. By looking at
trends, senior management can identify systemic issues, bottlenecks, and rent-seeking officials that frustrate service
users. Equally importantly, it is an effort to communicate to the citizen that the state cares about their welfare.
In Albania, this effort is led by the office of the Minister of State for Anti-Corruption.  A pilot was launched in
November 2014 and was scaled up in March 2015. About 1,000 citizens per day are contacted after using
government services at the property registration offices or state run hospitals.  The response rate has been 22
percent.
Some citizens have reported bad service delivery. “They did not ask for a bribe but if you don't pay they neglect
you. I speak from experience, it happened with my mother. Thanks,” says one visitor to the state hospital. “I have
never been asked for a bribe but your specialists exceed the official deadline for the update of the land ownership
certificate. It is delivered after a month”, says another citizen receiving services at the Tirana registration office.
“Mr. Minister, to be honest no one asked for a bribe and with pity I came to a conclusion. There were no beds for
people to lie in and they were being treated in the corridor close to the toilets. This is just as damaging as bribes”,
says another patient. “Thank you for the message Mr. Minister, the staff did not ask for a bribe but the made me go
around in circles to pay 54000 ALL more than I should have. Thank you,” says another citizen, suggesting implicit
bribery.
Some citizens have suggested improvements. “I have a suggestion, if it is possible to open some more counters as
the queues are long”; “Monitor application deadlines with trustworthy people. Completion of the applications in a
short time or delays for months is a tell-tale sign of corruption.” Some citizens are thankful for the effort:” I wish
you well Mr. Minister, I take this SMS as a sign of the effort to regulate that institution. I only communicate via
letters so I have not been asked for a bribe but I must say that lately this institution's performance has been at its
worst”.
Responses are entered into a database and categorized on the basis of a protocol.  Eventually, the reports made
available in real time to both the agency providing the service and to the DU monitoring the services on behalf of the
Prime Minister.

Providing Assisted Access
45.
The project will employ a variety of means to provide assisted internet access to
online services. The relative inability of the large sections of the society (the poor and
vulnerable, including older and digitally illiterate population, especially in remote rural areas) to
access online services on their own is a challenge. The points of contact will include local
government points of service, internet cafés, and community centers. This approach takes

advantage of the closer proximity of these facilities with internet access to the poor and
vulnerable target groups. The outreach will consist in the provision of basic training for
employees or owners on how to access the online services portal, as well the distribution of
various informational materials. The internet cafés will gain additional business; their owners
will therefore be motivated to provide assisted internet access to online services. For local
government employees, assisted internet access to central government online services will
become part of the services to the public they are required to provide. The post offices, which are
spread throughout the country, provide a computer but they do not provide assistance and advice.
Absence of profit motive also means that the government computers are also barely used. The
project will measure the number of government-trained points of assisted internet access
included in the outreach network. The marginal cost of this effort is low, while the benefits are
likely to be substantial.
Component 3: Building Capacity to Deliver
46.
Progress of this ambitious reform depends on careful planning, resource allocation,
regular and intensive use of the performance data, and institutional capacity and coordination,
and communication with key stakeholders. The third component of the project will focus on
interventions that build capacity to deliver.
Improving Strategic Planning
47.
The GoA plans to develop and approve a Reform Policy Document (RPD) that will
outline a strategic plan for the Citizen Centric Service Delivery reform. This document will
detail costing, sequencing, and design choices, to improve implementation of the project and
manage expectations and role of key stakeholders. The formulation of the Plan follows months
of the discussions of the reforms, internally and with key external stakeholders, review of major
policy options, and considerable analytical work,  This document and the process of its
formulation will help clarify the Government’s reform objectives, and how the Government
intends to go about achieving them, communicate the Government’s intentions to internal and
external stakeholders, and provide framework for external financing, including World Bank
financing. In particular, the document will address the following:
a. Strategic objectives and expected results of the reform program, linking the main
problems (delays, petty corruption, poor attitude, inconvenience, unpredictability) and the
context (relatively low internet penetration, access issues, cost) with the proposed
solutions (namely separation of front and back offices through CSC, re-engineering,
information provision, enhanced IT system, assisted access for the poor, and online
delivery of  services).
b. Assessment of the Business Case for the CSC, describing the benefits that are expected to
arise from the implementation of CSCs and how these benefits will be realized. The
benefits may include:  timeliness of processing and reductions in transactions costs for
government agencies and customers;  improvements in access;  greater convenience
through extended hours;  improved quality of customer service;  enhanced predictability
of timing; improved monitoring of back office performance;  and improved on-site
information provision.  The strategy will draw on the lessons learned from existing
experiences, such as established municipal and sectoral one-stop-shops in Albania (for
example, under the Ministry of Economic Development, Trade and Entrepreneurship the

National Registration Center (NRC) and National Licensing Center (NLC) have each
launched one-stop-shops for the registration of businesses and licensing, respectively, and
a one-stop-shop has been established at the municipal level in Lezha).
c. Prerequisites for achieving program results. International experience suggests that the
efficiency and accountability gains from one-stop shop solutions are likely to be modest
unless they are accompanied by back-office regulatory reform, such as digitization and
interoperability of key databases and improved business and regulatory processes.  The
strategy would ideally lay out how these prerequisites will be addressed by making
provision for business process reengineering of priority services and expediting full
digitization and interoperability of existing registers (property, health insurance, and
pension registers).
d. Poverty and Social Impacts. Improving quality without compromising (let alone
enhancing) access to administrative services may be a challenge. Currently, citizens can
access individual services in multiple locations (the national ID for instance can be issued
at eleven locations in Tirana and 400-plus other locations elsewhere in Albania).
Centralization of services in the CSCs could have an adverse impact by increasing the
cost of accessing services, particularly where a citizen is accessing only one service.
These costs may represent a barrier for vulnerable groups. While the initial focus has to
be the big urban centers, the needs of the less advantaged groups will have to be
accounted for and appropriate interventions rolled out to ensure equity in outreach of
quality services.   Risks can also be mitigated by maintaining multiple access points be
preserved while a new option of obtaining services at a CSC is introduced.
e. Role of the private sector. Private sector engagement in the delivery of administrative
services can increase efficiency, offer clients choice and reduce the cost of services to
beneficiaries. This can be achieved through a range of private sector delivery models,
ranging from contracting out through public-private partnerships.  Specific functions
could be undertaken by the private sector, for example, internet kiosks for provision of
information and assisted filling of application forms and scanning of documents.  Private
sector service providers could manage the interface points; call centers for help lines; and
telecom companies for mobile payment solutions.  The strategy would consider the scope
and specific modalities for private sector engagement in the delivery of administrative
services and the operation of the CSC.
f. Costing and Donor Support. The strategy will also include the recurring and capital cost
of the reform program and identify sources of funding, cash flow needs and roles of
various development partners.
g. Regulatory Changes. The institutional mandate of the NAIS, ADISA, and DU needs to be
reviewed and defined for further clarity. The law on electronic authentication of
signatures also needs to be implemented.
h. Assessing Impact. Conduct of regular field surveys to measure the impact of the reform
and assess course direction is also important.
48.
The project links the approval of the Reform Policy Document to disbursement
(DLI). The document will include the topics identified above to provide of clarity of sequencing,

objectives, financing, and timing of delivery.  The RPD will be approved by the Strategic
Planning Committee chaired by Prime Minister.
Improving performance management
49.
This reform program cannot succeed without a concerted effort to improve the
quality of reported data and to develop a reporting framework of performance indicators.
Key citizen-facing organizations, including Property Registration Office, Health Insurance Fund,
Employment Agency, Civil Records Office, already possess the IT interface to easily collect and
transmit key data to enable improved performance management (year on year and inter-office
comparisons).  However, these institutions do not systematically collect and analyze such data.
Few institutions have well defined key performance indicators (KPIs). Those that do rarely use
them regularly to monitor performance of the subordinate offices. Conversely, subordinate
offices, with the exception of one or two ministries, report little or no performance information
up to the parent ministries.
50.
Baselines need to be measured and indicators clearly defined. Citizens widely
complain, including from the feedback received through the Citizen Feedback Monitoring
Program, that they face lengthy delays when accessing property registration documents. The data
submitted by the IPRO office on the other hand routinely records that almost all applications are
processed within the required six days. This anomaly could be the result of poor reporting of data
or poor definition of the process. The process from the citizen point  of view could include
multiple visits to seek information, seek documents from other government offices, coordinate
with lawyers clearly differs substantially from the one assumed by the IPRO office.
51.
Internal reporting and monitoring routines will be established.  Definition of
baselines and indicators, collection of quality information, including through audit of this data
with citizen feedback, and development of periodic performance management reports and
circulation of information within the ministries will aid in this process. The DU will play a
coordinating role in this regard, but the key will be cascading the KPIs to middle managers and
senior policy makers. This can be done independently of the state of automation or reform of
various services, as most of the relevant information is already being collected in some form.
52.
The project will support these activities through technical assistance. TA funds will
assist the DU on the design of this system via remote connection, but strategic high-level
leadership and push will be crucial for rapid implementation.
Improving capacity of key reform drivers
53.
The office of the Minister of State for Innovation, the focal agency coordinating the
reforms and leading ADISA, will be strengthened. As a “minister without a portfolio”, the
Minister of State has very limited staff.  It is crucial that her office is strengthened to facilitate
the leadership function. ADISA is a new agency and will also require support to design and
manage the citizen facilitation centers.
54.
The DU, set up in the Prime Minister’s Office, has a mandate to work with and
across ministries.  DU’s goal is to unblock barriers to delivery, facilitate inter-ministerial
collaboration on priorities, engage in resolving implementation obstacles, and track
implementation progress toward targets through transparent monitoring mechanisms. An
important contribution the DU may offer in the implementation of this particular reform is the

establishment of a citizen feedback monitoring system and associated processes to gauge the
direct impact on citizens. The DU is uniquely placed to the consolidate information on a range of
services, analyze, and share this data with the Prime Minister and Cabinet and relevant
institutions. The DU is now fully staffed. An international consulting firm, with Government of
Kuwait assistance, has been hired to provide technical support. Periodic progress reports are
being prepared and presented to the Prime Minister. PPF and TA funds will help strengthen the
MIPA and the DU.
55.
An inter-ministerial coordination body as an institutional driver for the reform is a
prerequisite for success. A strong structure for oversight is necessary for such a complex multisectoral reform of service delivery. This role will be fulfilled by the Inter-Ministerial Public
Service Committee chaired by the Prime Minister that meets regularly to monitor progress,
address unexpected issues or impediments, and ensure that line ministries cooperate fully in
providing required information and implementing agreed reforms.  The Steering Committee for
the project, chaired by the Minister of Innovation, will provide inputs for consideration by the
Inter-Ministerial Public Services Committee.
56.
The project supports these activities through technical assistance. The PPF and TA
parts will help improve the policy planning and implementation capacity of the DU, the Ministry,
the PMU and ADISA. One of the intermediate progress indicators will measure the preparation
and circulation of periodic progress reports to senior leadership and field managers.
Communicating with stakeholders
57.
Effective communication is critical to the success of this reform program and will
improve citizens’ trust and perception of government responsiveness. PPF and TA funds will
help advertise benefits of the citizen facilitation centers to citizens and stakeholders through the
planned publicity campaign, promote the use of the portal, promote the citizen feedback
campaign, and organize change management activities
58.
It is equally important to strengthen communication with internal stakeholders.
Ministries, agencies and individual civil servants may not welcome ceding the front office
function to CSC.  Bureaucratic resistance could stifle efforts to improve back-office functions.
The fact that there are several lead agencies for different aspects of the project (ADISA for CSC,
NAIS for e-governance, DU for monitoring progress) and a wide range of institutional
stakeholders further complicates the reform process.  Diagnostics of the political economy of
reforms and a focus on change management can help identify and mitigate these risks.  So too
can an effective communications strategy and outreach to reform champions and potential
opponents. The TA and PFF parts of the project will help implement the communication
strategy.
Value Added of the Project to the Citizen
59.
There are a number of aspects of service delivery that are currently problematic for
Albanian citizens. These include the time needed to get information about available services,
gather required documents and information, number of visits to the issuing authority to apply for
and obtain services, time spent in queue for information and service delivery, potential need to
make informal payments to obtain services, wait times for services to be processed by the
relevant authority, and inability to track progress of applications.  The project will target these
deficiencies through a number of activities.

60.
Enhancing the front office is the first step to changing the citizen experience with
service delivery. Construction of the CSC will act as a single window for citizens, improve
access and the quality of service. The CSC will expand access to services through more
convenient hours of operation. Currently, most service windows are only open for six hours per
day, offering services from 8am-2pm. Expanding service hours past regular business hours
Monday-Friday, and offering weekend service provides additional opportunities for citizens to
access services at times convenient for them. The CSC also aims to improve the quality of
service by offering re-engineered services. The re-engineering aims to reduce the time spent
collecting documents and certificates, reduce the number of trips to different public service units,
and offer simpler application systems and procedures. The time spent by the citizen preparing
documents for a service can be burdensome. For example, collecting the necessary documents
for a driver’s license can exceed four days, then an additional two days for service authorization
and delivery. In many countries a driver’s license is available the same day, often within an hour.
The CSC aims to reduce the time citizens spend waiting in line to access services. Currently,
some service windows do not have established queuing systems, and the average wait time is
approximately thirty minutes. In other countries with OSS models, wait times usually fall under
five minutes. In addition, the CSC will feature service providers trained in customer service
culture to provide a better experience for the citizen. The separation of front and back offices has
the potential to reduce opportunities for gatekeeping, petty corruption and limit administrative
discretion. Aside from constructing a new CSC, existing points of service delivery will be
preserved, requiring font office reform.  ADISA is currently researching options for enhancing
front offices, including models of public-private partnerships, outsourcing front end
responsibilities, and retraining current staff in customer service to develop a citizen centered
culture of service. Once a model is chosen, this will be piloted in a number of agencies to test the
results.
61.
Concurrently, service re-engineering aims to reduce the time required for citizens to
obtain services calculated to include time to get information, obtain necessary documentation to
apply, the wait time in the application process as well as the time until receiving the requested
services received. This will be achieved by examining each service, identifying areas for
simplification including reduction or elimination of required documentation, number and type of
processing steps, and examining ways to speed delivery, which may include delivery via email,
e-Albania Portal, or document delivery through the service window.
62.
Additional mechanism to improve service delivery is online provision of services.
Under the project, NAIS will continue its efforts to enhance the level of online service delivery.
By the end of the project, 75 services will have moved from level 1 to level 3 capabilities. This
change will increase access to services and simplify service delivery through online means,
potentially eliminating any need to interact personally with service providers. For example, one
service, issuing archived technical documents, currently requires thirteen separate steps and three
separate visits of the citizen to the service office to obtain. Moving this service online would
eliminate six steps of the process. Most importantly, the citizen will not have to visit the office,
but instead will apply, submit documents and payments online, and download or print the
resulting completed document.
63.
The expected benefits to the citizen at the end of the project include:

(a) Increased ease of access to information and services to all citizens, including poor and
vulnerable groups;
(b) Improved citizen experience: less time wasted in queues, fewer trips to and from public
sector units, simpler documents and procedures, staff are responsive to citizen needs;
(c) Lower transaction costs for both the citizen and citizen-facing public sector units;
(d) Improved image of the public administration and increased integrity, transparency and
trust through reduced corruption;
(e) More effective and efficient deployment of resources including better coordination
between existing governmental systems and processes; and
(f) Multiple channels for service delivery provide citizens with choices which may change
depending on their needs at specific times.

Annex A2-1. List of core administrative services for the project

LEGEND:

n/a information unavailable as of June 15, 2015
0 in the "Time" columns refers to services that provided instantly
1 in the "Time" columns refers to services provided instantly but that require more than one visit to the service window

C = calculated cumulative number for all these types certificates for year 2013 is 330,023

L0 under current e-level means that the service in question is not currently an e-service.

tbd – to be determined

Source: Prime Minister’s DU, MIPA, ADISA, NAIS

#
Ministry
Agency
Name of the service
Real
Time
(days)
Legal
Time
(days)
Number of
Transactions
(per year)
 Type
of
Service
Current
e-level
Target elevelMinistry of
Economy
National
Licensing  Centre
(NLC)
License for pre-university
secondary education
 G2B
Ministry of
Economy
National
Licensing  Centre
(NLC)
License for research and
exploration (mining)
 G2B
Ministry of
Economy
National
Licensing  Centre
(NLC)
Mining exploitation permit
 G2B
Ministry of
Economy
National
Licensing  Centre
(NLC)
License for the expertise
and / or professional
services related to  mineral
resources
 G2B
Ministry of
Economy
National
Licensing  Centre
(NLC)
License for Bailiff services
 G2B
Ministry of
Economy
National
Licensing  Centre
(NLC)
License for vocational
training
 G2B
Ministry of
Economy
National
Licensing  Centre
(NLC)
Employment mediation
license (Private
Employment Agencies)
 G2B
Ministry of
Economy
National
Licensing  Centre
(NLC)
License for community
care services
 G2B

Ministry of
Economy
National
Licensing  Centre
(NLC)
Type B Environmental
Permit
 G2B
Ministry of
Economy
National
Licensing  Centre
(NLC)
Type C Environmental
Permit
 G2B
Ministry of
Economy
National
Licensing  Centre
(NLC)
License for professional
fishing in the sea
 G2B
Ministry of
Economy
National
Licensing  Centre
(NLC)
License for Other
professional activities
related to the impact on
the environment
 n/a
 n/a
 G2B
Ministry of
Economy
National
Licensing  Centre
(NLC)
License for emergency
intervention services
 G2B
Ministry of
Economy
National
Licensing  Centre
(NLC)
License for security
services, transportation
and escort of  monetary
values and precious items
 G2B
Ministry of
Economy
National
Licensing  Centre
(NLC)
License for a Driver's
Education to offer the
driving license
 G2B
Ministry of
Economy
National
Licensing  Centre
(NLC)
License for international
road transport of
passengers
 G2B
Ministry of
Economy
National
Licensing  Centre
(NLC)
License for international
road transport of goods for
third parties  and for rent
 G2B
Ministry of
Economy
National
Licensing  Centre
(NLC)
Animal Breeding License
for  livestock in  large
agricultural farms
 G2B
Ministry of
Economy
National
Licensing  Centre
(NLC)
License for
manufacturing, processing
and wholesale distribution
of food
 G2B
Ministry of
Economy
National
Licensing  Centre
(NLC)
License for wholesale
trade of food of animal
origin (for human
consumption).
 G2B
Ministry of
Economy
National
Licensing  Centre
(NLC)
License for Wholesale
Trade of livestock
 G2B
Ministry of
Economy
National
Licensing  Centre
(NLC)
License for pharmaceutical
agency
 G2B
Ministry of
Economy
National
Licensing  Centre
(NLC)
License for pharmacy
 G2B
Ministry of
Economy
National
Licensing  Centre
(NLC)
License for Hospital
Services
 G2B
Ministry of
Economy
National
Licensing  Centre
(NLC)
License for Wholesale
trade of pharmaceuticals
for humans
 G2B
Ministry of
Economy
National
Licensing  Centre
(NLC)
License for upper basic
education
 G2B
Ministry of
Economy
National
Licensing  Centre
(NLC)
License for lower basic
education
 G2B
Ministry of
Economy
National
Licensing  Centre
(NLC)
License for pre-primary
education (kindergarten)
 G2B
Ministry of
Economy
National
Licensing  Centre
(NLC)
License for secondary
education (high-school)
 G2B

Ministry of
Economy
National
Licensing  Centre
(NLC)
License for veterinary
pharmacy
 G2B
Ministry of
Economy
National
Licensing  Centre
(NLC)
License for medical
cabinet
 G2B
Ministry of
Economy
National
Licensing  Centre
(NLC)
License for dental cabinet
 G2B
Ministry of
Economy
National
Licensing  Centre
(NLC)
License for dental clinic
 G2B
Ministry of
Economy
National
Licensing  Centre
(NLC)
License to exercise
piloting
 G2B
tbd
Ministry of
Economy
National
Licensing  Centre
(NLC)
License for the production
and/or trade of seeds and
seedlings
 G2B
Ministry of
Economy
National
Licensing  Centre
(NLC)
License for a medical
center
 G2B
Ministry of
Economy
National
Licensing  Centre
(NLC)
License for laboratory
services-Dental
Laboratory
 G2B
Ministry of
Economy
National
Licensing  Centre
(NLC)
License for intervention
hygiene-sanitary services
 G2B
Ministry of
Economy
National
Licensing  Centre
(NLC)
License for services of
people, objects and
activities protection
 G2B
Ministry of
Economy
National
Licensing  Centre
(NLC)
License for Wholesale of
gas and diesel
 G2B
Ministry of
Economy
National
Registration Center
(NRC)
The initial registration of
natural person
12342
 G2B
Ministry of
Economy
National
Registration Center
(NRC)
Business name reservation
 G2B
Ministry of
Economy
National
Registration Center
(NRC)
Initial Registration with a
statute registration form
n/a
 G2B
tbd
Ministry of
Economy
National
Registration Center
(NRC)
Initial Registration with a
statute prepared by the
parties
 n/a
 n/a
n/a
 G2B
tbd
Ministry of
Economy
National
Registration Center
(NRC)
Registrations of public
authority decisions at the
request of any third
parties  (other than those
made by the entity itself).
n/a
 G2B
tbd
Ministry of
Economy
National
Registration Center
(NRC)
Issue of Extracts for data
from the commercial
register.
n/a
 G2B
Ministry of
Urban
Planning
Central Technical
Archive of
Construction
Issuing archived technical
documents( Obtaining Gen
Plan A4)
n/a
1,200
 G2C &
G2B
Ministry of
Economy
National
Registration Center
(NRC)
Registration of the
reorganization of
companies Separation in
existing companies
n/a
 G2B
tbd
Ministry of
Economy
National
Registration Center
(NRC)
Registration of the
reorganization of
companies Separation in
new companies
n/a
 G2B
tbd
Ministry of
Economy
National
Registration Center
(NRC)
Registration of the
reorganization of
companies Merger with a
new company
n/a
 G2B
tbd

Ministry of
Economy
National
Registration Center
(NRC)
Registration of the
reorganization of
companies Merger by
absorption
n/a
 G2B
tbd
Ministry of
Economy
National
Registration Center
(NRC)
Suspension of activity
n/a
 G2B
tbd
Ministry of
Economy
National
Registration Center
(NRC)
Natural person
deregistration
 n/a
 n/a
n/a
 G2B
Ministry of
Economy
National
Registration Center
(NRC)
Legal person
deregistration
 n/a
 n/a
n/a
 G2B
Ministry of
Economy
National
Registration Center
(NRC)
Liquidation of legal person
 n/a
 n/a
n/a
 G2B
tbd
Ministry of
Education
and Sports
Ministry of
Education and
Sports
Registration of students K12 in schools and
kindergartens, according
to residence (Registration
in kindergartens)
 G2C
Ministry of
Education
and Sports
Ministry of
Education and
Sports
Recognition of foreign
qualifications for the first
and second cycle
 G2C
Ministry of
Education
and Sports
Ministry of
Education and
Sports
Recognition of foreign
diplomas for PhD
n/a
 G2C
Ministry of
Education
and Sports
Ministry of
Education and
Sports
Registration of students K12 in schools and
kindergartens, according
to residence (first
grade  registration)
n/a
 G2C
Ministry of
Education
and Sports
Ministry of
Education and
Sports
Registration of students K12 in schools and
kindergartens, according
to residence (Registration
general high school)
n/a
 G2C
Ministry of
Education
and Sports
Ministry of
Education and
Sports
Registration of students K12 schools and
kindergartens, according
to residence (registration
in professional college ,
selection by competition)
 G2C
Ministry of
Education
and Sports
Ministry of
Education and
Sports
Registration of students K12 schools and
kindergartens, according
to residence (Registration
professional college
without competition)
 G2C
Ministry of
Education
and Sports
Ministry of
Education and
Sports
Legalization of grades
 n/a
n/a
 G2C
Ministry of
Health
Compulsory Health
Insurance Fund
(CHIF)
Issuing the health booklet
 G2C
Ministry of
Justice
Immovable
Property
Registration Office
(IPRO)
Issue of  ownership
certificate
88252
 G2C &
G2B
Ministry of
Justice
Immovable
Property
Registration Office
(IPRO)
Issue copies of property
files
111953
 G2C &
G2B
Ministry of
Justice
Immovable
Property
Registration Office
(IPRO)
Registration of sales
contracts
18171
 G2C &
G2B

Ministry of
Justice
Immovable
Property
Registration Office
(IPRO)
Issue of ownership
certificate
 G2C &
G2B
Ministry of
Justice
Immovable
Property
Registration Office
(IPRO)
Registration of
inheritance
155302
 G2C &
G2B
Ministry of
Justice
Immovable
Property
Registration Office
(IPRO)
Initial registration of the
immovable property
without a layout plan  and
verification  from IPRO
969562
 G2C &
G2B
Ministry of
Justice
Immovable
Property
Registration Office
(IPRO)
Registration of legalized
objects.
26890
 G2C &
G2B
Ministry of
Justice
Immovable
Property
Registration Office
(IPRO)
Registration of transfer of
property by law, by court
decision or an
administrative act.
 G2C &
G2B
Ministry of
Justice
Immovable
Property
Registration Office
(IPRO)
The registration
of  the  mortgage  contract
to guarantee the  loans  by
banks or other credit
providing institution, for
loans amounting to
1,000,000 ALL to
10,000.000 ALL  as well
as copy of the file within
this deadline .
 G2C &
G2B
Ministry of
Justice
Immovable
Property
Registration Office
(IPRO)
Final Registration of new
construction.
30683
 G2C &
G2B
Ministry of
Justice
Immovable
Property
Registration Office
(IPRO)
Registration of the
Exchange  Contract
 G2C &
G2B
Ministry of
Justice
Immovable
Property
Registration Office
(IPRO)
The registration of the
mortgage contract to
guarantee loans  by banks
or other credit providing
institution, for loans
amounting to over
10.000,000 ALL as well as
copy of the file within this
deadline
 G2C &
G2B
Ministry of
Justice
Immovable
Property
Registration Office
(IPRO)
Registration donation
contract
 G2C &
G2B
Ministry of
Justice
Immovable
Property
Registration Office
(IPRO)
Registration of the
building permit
 G2C &
G2B
Ministry of
Justice
Immovable
Property
Registration Office
(IPRO)
Registration of notary acts
between property
developers and land
owners or third parties.
 G2C &
G2B
Ministry of
Justice
Immovable
Property
Registration Office
(IPRO)
The registration of the
mortgage contract to
guarantee  loans  by banks
or other credit providing
institutions, for loans
amounting to 1,000,000
lek  as well as issue a copy
of the file within this
deadline
 G2C &
G2B

Ministry of
Justice
Immovable
Property
Registration Office
(IPRO)
Registration / change /
termination of easement
 G2C &
G2B
Ministry of
Justice
Immovable
Property
Registration Office
(IPRO)
Initial registration of
immovable property with
the layout plan  and the
verification  from IPRO
 G2C &
G2B
Ministry of
Justice
Immovable
Property
Registration Office
(IPRO)
Registration of the lease or
sublease
 G2C &
G2B
Ministry of
Justice
Immovable
Property
Registration Office
(IPRO)
Temporary Registration of
the building's  frame
structure
 G2C &
G2B
Ministry of
Justice
Immovable
Property
Registration Office
(IPRO)
Registration of court
decision to ensure lawsuit
security measure
 G2C &
G2B
Ministry of
Justice
Immovable
Property
Registration Office
(IPRO)
Specific initial registration
of immovable properties in
rural areas (not including
the legal deadline of 45
days).
 G2C &
G2B
Ministry of
Justice
Immovable
Property
Registration Office
(IPRO)
Registration of preemption right
 G2C &
G2B
Ministry of
Justice
Immovable
Property
Registration Office
(IPRO)
Registration of "titles in
use"
 G2C &
G2B
Ministry of
Social
Welfare and
Youth
Social Insurance
Institute (SII)
Maternity income for the
self-employed
n/a
 G2C
tbd
Ministry of
Social
Welfare and
Youth
Social Insurance
Institute (SII)
Old age pension
31437
 G2C
Ministry of
Social
Welfare and
Youth
Social Insurance
Institute (SII)
Disability pension
 G2C
Ministry of
Social
Welfare and
Youth
Social Insurance
Institute (SII)
Family pension
 G2C
Ministry of
Social
Welfare and
Youth
Social Insurance
Institute (SII)
End of pension and death
payout
23205
 G2C
Ministry of
Social
Welfare and
Youth
Social Insurance
Institute (SII)
Pension review
20721
 G2C
Ministry of
Social
Welfare and
Youth
Social Insurance
Institute (SII)
Pension Transfer
 G2C
Ministry of
Social
Welfare and
Youth
Social Insurance
Institute (SII)
Application for attestation
of  pension amount
n/a
n/a
 G2C
Ministry of
Social
Welfare and
Youth
Social Insurance
Institute (SII)
Attestation for the
contributions payment as
natural person
n/a
n/a
n/a
G2B
tbd

Ministry of
Social
Welfare and
Youth
Social Insurance
Institute (SII)
Attestation for period of
work in Agricultural
Cooperatives
n/a
n/a
n/a
G2C
tbd
Ministry of
Social
Welfare and
Youth
Social Insurance
Institute (SII)
Attestation for period of
work in Public Institution
before 01.01.1994
n/a
n/a
n/a
G2C
tbd
Ministry of
Social
Welfare and
Youth
Social Insurance
Institute (SII)
Salary attestation for
periods before  01.01.1994
n/a
n/a
n/a
G2C
tbd
Ministry of
Social
Welfare and
Youth
Social Insurance
Institute (SII)
Certificate of contributions
paid as hired after
01.01.1994
n/a
n/a
20000
G2C
tbd
Ministry of
Social
Welfare and
Youth
Social Insurance
Institute (SII)
Maternity remuneration
for the self-employed
n/a
 G2C
tbd
Ministry of
Social
Welfare and
Youth
Social Insurance
Institute (SII)
Maternity remuneration
for the employed
n/a
 G2C
tbd
Ministry of
Social
Welfare and
Youth
Social Insurance
Institute (SII)
Compensation of income
for sickness  when
changing workplace
n/a
n/a
 G2C
tbd
Ministry of
Social
Welfare and
Youth
Social Insurance
Institute (SII)
Maternity income for the
employees
n/a
 G2C
tbd
Ministry of
Social
Welfare and
Youth
Social Insurance
Institute (SII)
Compensation of income
for maternity when
changing workplace
n/a
n/a
 G2C
tbd
Ministry of
Social
Welfare and
Youth
Social Insurance
Institute (SII)
Incomes for sickness for
employed persons
n/a
 G2C
tbd
Ministry of
Social
Welfare and
Youth
Social Insurance
Institute (SII)
Incomes for temporary
disability of occupational
accident and occupational
diseases
n/a
 G2C
tbd
Ministry of
Social
Welfare and
Youth
Social Insurance
Institute (SII)
Additional medical care
for rehabilitation in case of
accidents occupational and
occupational diseases
 G2C
tbd
Ministry of
Social
Welfare and
Youth
Social Insurance
Institute (SII)
Closure  supplementary
pension or special
treatment
n/a
n/a
 G2C
tbd
Ministry of
Social
Welfare and
Youth
Social Insurance
Institute (SII)
Payment for funeral
expenses
19552
 G2C
tbd
Ministry of
Social
Welfare and
Youth
Social Insurance
Institute (SII)
Partial disability pension
 G2C
tbd
Ministry of
Social
Welfare and
Youth
Social Insurance
Institute (SII)
Reduced disability pension
 G2C
tbd
Ministry of
Social
Welfare and
Youth
Social Insurance
Institute (SII)
Incomes for permanent
disability of occupational
accident and occupational
diseases
 G2C
tbd

Ministry of
Social
Welfare and
Youth
Social Insurance
Institute (SII)
Incomes for permanent
partial disability of
occupational accident and
occupational diseases
 G2C
tbd
Ministry of
Social
Welfare and
Youth
Social Insurance
Institute (SII)
Incomes for permanent
disability in some small
measure from the accident
and occupational diseases
n/a
 G2C
tbd
Ministry of
Social
Welfare and
Youth
Social Insurance
Institute (SII)
Additional Incomes for
dependent children
n/a
 G2C
tbd
Ministry of
Social
Welfare and
Youth
Social Insurance
Institute (SII)
Additional Incomes for
care
n/a
 G2C
tbd
Ministry of
Social
Welfare and
Youth
Social Insurance
Institute (SII)
Reduced old age pension
 G2C
tbd
Ministry of
Social
Welfare and
Youth
Social Insurance
Institute (SII)
Old age pension as a
coalminer / law no.
140/2014 dated
11.06.2014
n/a
n/a
 G2C
tbd
Ministry of
Social
Welfare and
Youth
Social Insurance
Institute (SII)
Early pension for the
seniority service/law no.
10142, dated 15.03.2009,
amended
n/a
 G2C
tbd
Ministry of
Social
Welfare and
Youth
Social Insurance
Institute (SII)
Financial reward for the
families of martyrs
according to law no. 8607,
dated 27.04.2000
n/a
 G2C
tbd
Ministry of
the Interior
General Directorate
of Civil Status
Application and supply
with electronic  ID card
124000
 G2C
Ministry of
the Interior
General Directorate
of Civil Status
Application and supply
with biometric passport by
normal procedure
177107
 G2C
Ministry of
the Interior
General Directorate
of Civil Status
Family certificate
n/a
n/a
 G2C
Ministry of
the Interior
General Directorate
of Civil Status
Marriage certificate
n/a
n/a
 G2C
tbd
Ministry of
the Interior
General Directorate
of Civil Status
Death certificate
n/a
C
 G2C
tbd
Ministry of
the Interior
General Directorate
of Civil Status
Family separation
n/a
C
 G2C
Ministry of
the Interior
General Directorate
of Civil Status
Family reunification
n/a
C
 G2C
Ministry of
the Interior
General Directorate
of Civil Status
Act of birth
n/a
42848
 G2C
Ministry of
the Interior
General Directorate
of Civil Status
Act of death
n/a
20775
 G2C
Ministry of
the Interior
General Directorate
of Civil Status
Act of marriage
23751
 G2C
Ministry of
the Interior
General Directorate
of Civil Status
Personal Certificate
n/a
C
 G2C
Ministry of
Transport
and
Infrastructure
General Directorate
of Road Transport
Service (GDRTS)
Permanent deregistration
of vehicle
14750
 G2C &
G2B
Ministry of
Transport
and
Infrastructure
General Directorate
of Road Transport
Service (GDRTS)
Temporary deregistration
of vehicle
 G2C &
G2B

Ministry of
Transport
and
Infrastructure
General Directorate
of Road Transport
Service (GDRTS)
Constructive change of the
vehicle
 G2C &
G2B
Ministry of
Transport
and
Infrastructure
General Directorate
of Road Transport
Service (GDRTS)
Issuing temporary driving
license
 G2C &
G2B
tbd
Ministry of
Transport
and
Infrastructure
General Directorate
of Road Transport
Service (GDRTS)
Issuing international
driving license
63940
 G2C &
G2B
Ministry of
Transport
and
Infrastructure
General Directorate
of Road Transport
Service (GDRTS)
Payment of the annual
taxes of used vehicles
 G2C &
G2B
Ministry of
Transport
and
Infrastructure
General Directorate
of Road Transport
Service (GDRTS)
Change of license plate in
case of lost, stolen or
damaged vehicle
 G2C &
G2B
Ministry of
Transport
and
Infrastructure
General Directorate
of Road Transport
Service (GDRTS)
Change of vehicle
circulation license (lost,
stolen or damaged)
 G2C &
G2B
tbd
Ministry of
Transport
and
Infrastructure
General Directorate
of Road Transport
Service (GDRTS)
Change of the vehicle's
ownership
33321
 G2C &
G2B
Ministry of
Transport
and
Infrastructure
General Directorate
of Road Transport
Service (GDRTS)
Removal of the
registration device of the
digital tachograph
n/a
 G2C &
G2B
tbd
Ministry of
Transport
and
Infrastructure
General Directorate
of Road Transport
Service (GDRTS)
Two yearly inspection of
the analogue tachograph
 G2C &
G2B
tbd
Ministry of
Transport
and
Infrastructure
General Directorate
of Road Transport
Service (GDRTS)
Six yearly inspection of
the analogue tachograph
n/a
 G2C &
G2B
tbd
Ministry of
Transport
and
Infrastructure
General Directorate
of Road Transport
Service (GDRTS)
Initial calibration of the
digital tachograph
n/a
 G2C &
G2B
tbd
Ministry of
Transport
and
Infrastructure
General Directorate
of Road Transport
Service (GDRTS)
Calibration of the
analogue tachograph
 G2C &
G2B
tbd
Ministry of
Transport
and
Infrastructure
General Directorate
of Road Transport
Service (GDRTS)
Issuing temporary license
plate
 G2C &
G2B
tbd
Ministry of
Transport
and
Infrastructure
General Directorate
of Road Transport
Service (GDRTS)
Issuing the digital card of
the tachograph for the
driver of the vehicle
 G2C &
G2B
tbd
Ministry of
Transport
and
Infrastructure
General Directorate
of Road Transport
Service (GDRTS)
Issuing the digital card of
the tachograph for a group
control
n/a
 G2C &
G2B
tbd
Ministry of
Transport
and
Infrastructure
General Directorate
of Road Transport
Service (GDRTS)
Issuing the digital card of
the tachograph for the
nominal control
 G2C &
G2B
tbd
Ministry of
Transport
and
Infrastructure
General Directorate
of Road Transport
Service (GDRTS)
Issuing the digital card of
the tachograph for the
tachograph's repair shops
 G2C &
G2B
tbd

Ministry of
Transport
and
Infrastructure
General Directorate
of Road Transport
Service (GDRTS)
Issuing the digital card of
the tachograph for the
society
 G2C &
G2B
tbd
Ministry of
Transport
and
Infrastructure
General Directorate
of Road Transport
Service (GDRTS)
Issuing the License to
Transport Goods with nonconventional vehicles
n/a
 G2C &
G2B
tbd
Ministry of
Transport
and
Infrastructure
General Directorate
of Road Transport
Service (GDRTS)
Validation of driving
licenses issued from
foreign countries into
Albanian
n/a
 G2C &
G2B
tbd
Ministry of
Transport
and
Infrastructure
General Directorate
of Road Transport
Service (GDRTS)
Issuing the Professional
Capacities Certificate
n/a
n/a
 G2C &
G2B
tbd
Ministry of
Transport
and
Infrastructure
General Directorate
of Road Transport
Service (GDRTS)
Issuing the Training
Certificate ADR
 G2C &
G2B
tbd
Ministry of
Transport
and
Infrastructure
General Directorate
of Road Transport
Service (GDRTS)
Issuing the Technical
Control of Security
Certificate for Vehicles,
Trailers or Semi-Trailers,
between two or more
CEMT members
 G2C &
G2B
tbd
Ministry of
Transport
and
Infrastructure
General Directorate
of Road Transport
Service (GDRTS)
Issuing the Taxi Driving
License
 G2B
Ministry of
Transport
and
Infrastructure
General Directorate
of Road Transport
Service (GDRTS)
Issuing the Special
Driving License
n/a
 G2C &
G2B
tbd
Ministry of
Transport
and
Infrastructure
General Maritime
Directorate
Issuance of the certificates
of minimum for the
shippers of freight  and
fisheries
n/a
n/a
 G2B
tbd
Ministry of
Transport
and
Infrastructure
General Maritime
Directorate
The registration and
deregistration of Ships
under construction
n/a
 G2B
tbd
Ministry of
Transport
and
Infrastructure
General Maritime
Directorate
Issuance of the certificate
of competence / CKP
n/a
n/a
n/a
 G2C &
G2B
tbd
Ministry of
Transport
and
Infrastructure
General Maritime
Directorate
Registration and supplying
Sailing License for Small
Sailing Vessels
n/a
 G2C &
G2B
Ministry of
Transport
and
Infrastructure
General Maritime
Directorate
Registration and the
equipment with navigation
passport for commercial
fleet sailor
n/a
n/a
n/a
 G2C
tbd
Ministry of
Transport
and
Infrastructure
General Maritime
Directorate
Final registration,
provisional registration
and deregistration of ships
bareboat contract
n/a
n/a
 G2B
tbd
Ministry of
Transport
and
Infrastructure
General Maritime
Directorate
Registration of Small
Sailing Vessels
n/a
 G2C &
G2B
Ministry of
Transport
and
Infrastructure
General Maritime
Directorate
Final Registration of
Sea  Motors
n/a
 G2C &
G2B

Ministry of
Transport
and
Infrastructure
General Maritime
Directorate
Registration of loans and
mortgage
contracts   of   sailing
vessels
n/a
 G2C &
G2B

Annex A2-2.  Definition of e-Service Levels and Expansion of e-Albania Program

1.
The e-Albania portal (www.e-albania.al launched in November 2012, and upgraded
in April 2015) offers more than 500 services as of June 2015 (Table A2.1). Most of these
services are Level 1 and Level 2 (for the provision of information about procedures, and for
downloading application forms). NAIS estimates that there are 63 Level 3 e-services, and 109
Level 4 e-services (transaction with full electronic processing), in addition to ten e-services
specifically offered by NAIS.

2.
Currently, the “e-Service registry” providing detailed information about all online
services available through e-Albania portal is in the works. In order to define the baseline and
target values of the services included in the project, initial estimates of NAIS were taken into
consideration.

Table A2.1: Services available from the e-Albania portal (as of June 2015)

#
e-Albania Service Categories
# of Srv
Law and Justice
Economy
Transport
Food and Agriculture
Auctions and Public Procurement
Taxes and Money
Employment and Vocational Training
Health and Welfare
Defense and National Security
Business and NGOs
Environment and Energy
Science and Technology
History, Art, Culture
Documents and Certificates
Education
Benefits, Aid, Economic Grants
Real Estate
Consumer Protection
Utility Bills

Total

3.
In order to ensure compatibility with the latest UN framework, the definitions
included in the United Nations (UN) E-Government Development 2014 Database will be
used while assessing the status of online services provided through e-Albania portal3 (Box
A2.1).  Considering these definitions, current mapping of the online services available in the eAlbania portal will be reviewed again at the start of the project to ensure that NAIS selfassessment corresponds to the internationally accepted definitions.

Box A2.1: The four stages of online service development (UN 2014)

Stage / Level 1 Emerging information services
Government websites provide information on public policy, governance, laws, regulations, relevant documentation
and types of government services provided. They have links to ministries, departments and other branches of
government. Citizens are able to obtain updated information in the national government and ministries and can
follow links to archived information.
Stage / Level 2 Enhanced information services
Government websites deliver enhanced one-way or simple two-way e-communication between government and
citizen, such as downloadable forms for government services and applications. The sites have audio and video
capabilities and are multi-lingual. Some limited e-services enable citizens to submit requests for non-electronic
forms or personal information.
Stage / Level 3 Transactional services
Government websites engage in two-way communication with their citizens, including requesting and receiving
inputs on government policies, programs, regulations, etc. Some form of electronic authentication of the citizen’s
identity is required to successfully complete the exchange. Government websites process non-financial transactions,
e.g. filing taxes online or applying for certificates, licenses, and permits. They also handle financial transactions, i.e.
where money is transferred on a secure network.
Stage / Level 4 Connected services
Government websites have changed the way governments communicate with their citizens. They are proactive in
requesting information and opinions from the citizens using Web 2.0 and other interactive tools. E-services and esolutions cut across the departments and ministries in a seamless manner, information, data and knowledge is
transferred from government agencies through integrated applications. Governments have moved from a
government-centric to a citizen-centric approach, where e-services are targeted to citizens through life cycle events
and segmented groups to provide tailor-made services. Governments create an environment that empowers citizens
to be more involved with government activities to have a voice in decision making.

4.
The project is designed to support ongoing expansion of the e-Albania program
during 2016-2019 timeframe. The 169 core services (Annex A2-1) selected for improvements
are also on scope for online delivery. The following tables summarize the current and target
levels of these services.

3 http://unpan3.un.org/egovkb/Portals/egovkb/Documents/un/2014-Survey/E-Gov_Complete_Survey-2014.pdf

Table A2.5: Current and target levels for 169 core services by selected government entities
#
Ministries /
Services
Current levels

Target levels
L0
L1
L2
L3
Total

L1
L2
L3
L4
tbd
Total
1 Ministry of
Economy

2 Ministry of
Education and
Sports

3 Ministry of
Health

4 Ministry of
Justice

5 Ministry of
Social Welfare
and Youth

6 Ministry of the
Interior

7 Ministry of
Transport and
Infrastructure

8 Ministry of
Urban Planning

Totals

Level 0 means that the service in question is not an e-service as of June 2015.

5.
It is expected that the total number of e-services that will be available once the
project is completed will exceed 650. The project will assist in ensuring the content and userfriendliness of mainly G2C and G2B e-services, and developing the “e-service registry” to
maintain the list of all e-Albania services with unique identifiers, define the levels of these
services consistently, and monitor the improvements in service levels and efficiency gains
(reduction in time and processing steps) historically. This will be part of the overall project work
with the inventory of all central government G2C and G2B services.

Annex 3: Implementation Arrangements

ALBANIA: Citizen Centric Service Delivery Project

1.
 The Minister of Innovation and Public Administration will implement and monitor
the project. Other institutions that will participate in project implementation include the Prime
Minister’s DU, National Agency for Information Society, Immovable Property Registration
Office, Social Insurance Institute, National Employment Service, and General Directorate of
Civil Status. In addition to these cores agencies, other government agencies, such as National
Licensing Centre and National Registration Centre and several other agencies delivering
administrative services will also be part of the project.

Figure A3.1:  Institutional Arrangements

2. Prime Minister chairs the Inter-ministerial Public Services Committee (IPSC) that
oversees the project at the strategic level.   This high level committee includes Ministers that
oversee all involved service provision agencies. It provides participating ministries and agencies
with strategic leadership and guidance, and resolves high level cross-ministerial problems
regarding the project.
3. The Minister of State for Innovation and Public Administration chairs a project
steering committee (SC). SC oversees project management at the policy level, to provide
guidance, identify problems and discuss corrective measures. Issues that cannot be resolved by
SC will be referred to IPSC. The SC meets weekly and includes the office of the Deputy Prime
Minister, heads of the Department of Development Programming, Financing and Assistance
from Abroad and the DU at the Prime Minister’s Office, NAIS, ADISA, the Project Director and
thematic leaders. Monthly meeting of the SC with the Deputy Prime Minister are anticipated.
PM
Delivery Unit; NAIS
LEAD: MIPA
ADISA
CSC
MoF
CFCU
MoLSA
SII
MoH
HII
MoI
IPRO
Other
ministries
Service Delivery
Agencies
CoM

Figure A3-2.  Project Oversight

4.
The Technical Inter-ministerial Committee will oversee the business process
reengineering by the working groups.  It is chaired by the Minister of Innovation and includes
the heads of all participating agencies (e.g. Immovable Property Registration Office, Social
Insurance Institute, National Agency Information Society, and General Directorate of Civil
Status). Ministerial and Technical Working Groups at the agency level for business process
engineering have been created. Under guidance from the project and the DU, the relevant
Working Group will: prepare process maps and legal inventory for pilot services; prepare
proposals for new process maps and a legal reform inventory for revised and re-engineered
services, modernizing how applications are processed and approved internally; and undertake
analysis of the administrative cost of service delivery for their institutions. This will constitute
baseline data, which would be collated and summarized by ministries into short reports.
5.
The Project Management Unit (PMU), to be housed in the Agency for the Delivery
of Integrated Public Services (ADISA), will coordinate with all other key participating
agencies and support project implementation. The participating agencies will not directly
manage procurement under the Project. The Operations Manual will specify implementation
arrangements, fiduciary responsibilities, and a detailed description of EEPs and DLIs (including
their means of verification). Specific responsibilities of PMU for this Project comprise:
(a) liaising with the  Bank, overseeing technical inputs from all involved agencies and
consolidating documentation on EEPs, DLIs and TA activities to report to the Bank on
compliance in a timely and comprehensive manner;
(b) ensuring compliance with Bank financial management, procurement regulations and
safeguard requirements, preparing the Interim Financial Reports (IFRs), consolidating
project financial reports based on information provided by other agencies/departments on
planned and actual expenditures under EEPs, preparing and overseeing implementation
of specific Terms of Reference (TORs) for the annual audit and procurement reviews;
Strategy
• Interministerial  Public Services Committee (IPSC)
• Chair: Prime Minister
Policy
• Steering Committee (SC)
• Chair: Mister of State for Innovation and Public Administration
Operations

• Ministerial Working Groups (MWG)
• Project Director overseeing PMU in ADISA

(c) managing TA Component,  preparing and updating the procurement plan,  preparing
bidding documents and draft RFPs, publishing procurement notices and contract awards,
negotiating contracts with consultants; and preparing contract amendments;
(d) monitoring the Environmental Management Plan prepared for the CSC construction in
the relevant bidding and contractual documents, obliging therefore the contractor to
implement and supervisor to monitor implementation of the EMP. The PMU can
designate staff responsible for environmental issues or hire a part time consultant.

Financial Management, Disbursements and Procurement
Financial Management
6.
Country PFM status.  Albania has participated in a number of detailed reviews of its
public financial management (PFM) systems, among them: two Public Expenditure and
Financial Accountability (PEFA) assessments (2006 and 2011); a Public Expenditure Review
(2006); a Public Finance Review (2013); annual EU-SIGMA reviews; and other analysis by the
World Bank, the IMF, the EC, and other organizations.  The various reviews have plotted the
significant progress Albania has made in improving PFM.  The last PEFA assessment for
Albania from 2011 concluded that Albania has a fiscal and budget management system that is
functioning adequately, in the sense that the system has enabled the government to finance and
execute a budget that delivers public services to the general population.  Albania scores
relatively well on comprehensiveness and classification of the budget, basic treasury operations
(including budget, and payroll controls), financial reporting/transparency and public access to
government budget and financial information. Lagging areas, as identified in the 2011 PEFA
assessment, include: (i) multi-year perspective in fiscal planning and policy formulation; (ii)
internal audit; (iii) implementation of the integrated financial management information system
(FMIS); and (iv) scope and nature of the external audit function. Notwithstanding the
improvements in PFM systems, inadequate commitment controls and excessive growth in
payment arrears emerged as a serious problem in recent years.  The World Bank is currently
providing technical assistance to the MoF to help address this problem through an ECA PFM
Trust Fund.
7.
Staffing: CFCU, hosted in the MoF, has been tasked with fiduciary functions for the
Project Preparation Facility because of its existing capacity and experience with the Bank
fiduciary processes. Going forward, the PMU, which will be established under ADISA, will need
dedicated staff for the project’s financial management. Incremental staff to be hired, during the
PPA period, will include a Financial Reporting Officer and an Accounts Officer at the PMU. For
EEPs, the institutions identified will perform the accounting and reporting functions: through the
government’s Financial Management Information System (FMIS), for budget institutions; and
though own accounting and reporting system established in the non-budgetary institutions. In
particular the financial reporting officer shall prepare Project-level periodic financial reports,
review financial and non-financing reports extracted from the government’s FMIS and those
submitted from self-financing institutions, manage Project disbursements, and coordinate with
auditors the preparation of the Project’s audited financial statements. The financial reporting
officer will be also responsible for monitoring the budgeting process of the implementing

agencies for underlying investments necessary to achieve project results and indicators, making
sure that sufficient resources are appropriated each year.
8.
Budgeting: The budget and planning process differ among budgetary institutions and
non-budgetary ones.
(a) Budgetary institutions. Funding for EEPs will be allocated in the Government of Albania
budget using detailed object and functional classification prescribed in the Chart of
Accounts. The institution, program and economic codes to capture expenditures for
project Eligible Expenditure Programs (EEPs) clearly identified in the Chart of Accounts.
The Government follows a detailed budget calendar and a budget call circular including
detailed instructions is circulated during the year.  This calendar provides deadlines for
all the steps involved to ensure that there is sufficient time to receive, review, discuss,
and compile the inputs from all departments.  The consolidated budget is prepared by the
MoF for submission to the legislature.
(b) Public non-budgetary institutions. The budget prepared by the Principal Authorizing
Officer is submitted to the institution’s Board for review and approval. The approved
budget is submitted to the MoF and eventually approved by the Council of Ministers
before the budget year begins. Employee related expenses and sub-items (EEPs) are
clearly identified in the institutions budget.
(c) PPF and TA parts of the loan. Since the PPF and TA parts will be implemented by a
budgetary institution, the same budgeting and planning arrangements as above will be
applied for these parts of the loan.
9.
Accounting: There are different relevant issues for the RBF and PPF/TA parts of the
loan.

(a) For the RBF part of the loan: In the budgetary institutions, the EEPs related accounting
records will be maintained on modified accrual basis, consistently applied in all budget
institutions. EEPs include salaries and social security contributions of the budgetary
institutions which are processed in the government’s FMIS. However, the non-budgetary
(self-financing) institutions have their own accounting software where payroll data are
recorded. The payroll accounts in non-budgetary institutions are maintained in accrual
basis.

(b) For the PPF and TA parts of the loan: A financial management software acceptable to
the Bank will be purchased for project use.  The Project funds will be accounted
separately and Project chart of accounts will be defined based on Project activities. The
accounting and reporting software should be able to identify committed amounts for each
consultant/supplier and the respective liability, as well as to support transactions in
currencies other than reporting currency (Euro). It is proposed that procurement of the
accounting software is done during the PPF period.  Accounting records for all project
expenditure will be maintained by category and component.  Periodic reconciliation will
be performed between general ledger and Project bank accounts and WB disbursement
data.

10.
Financial Reporting: PMU will have the primary responsibility to prepare project level
financial reports on a monthly, quarterly, semi-annual and annual basis.

(a) The financial data on the EEPs will be prepared by each identified institution in the form
of a budget execution report, and submitted to the PMU. MoF/ Treasury
department/financial reporting unit will generate data EEPs related financial information
(budget and actual) with respect to those budgetary institutions for which accurate data
cannot be prepared at the institutions. The PMU will be responsible to consolidate such
data in single set of IFRs for the RBF part that will prepared on quarterly basis. The IFRs
will be prepared on cash basis in Albanian Lek. The process of collecting financial
information and preparing the IFRs, roles and responsibilities, and timing will be clearly
described in the POM.

(b) IFRs for the PPF and TA parts of the loan will be prepared on cash basis in quarterly
intervals and denominated in Euro (loan currency). These IFRs are intended to comprise
the following reports: sources and uses of funds, uses of funds by activity and contract
management information. The following table summarizes the financial reporting
arrangements of the project:

Table A3.1: Financial Reporting Arrangements
Report
Frequency
Due Date &
Recipient
Remarks
Management
Report on the
progress for the
PPF and TA parts
Monthly
Within 5 days of
the close of the
month to be
submitted to
Project Director
PMU
Details of receipts and payments for
PPF and TA parts including updated
status against agreed procurement
plan.
Budget Execution
Report (BER)
Quarterly
Within 30 days of
the close of the
quarter, MOF and
the identified
institutions will
furnish BER to the
Director of the
PMU
For each calendar quarter, BER will
be generated from the government’s
FMIS for EEPs and will report
original budget, re-appropriations,
and actual expenditure. The public
non budgetary institutions will report
on the execution of the EEPs for
their own entity.
Interim Financial
Reports (IFRs)
Quarterly
Within 45 days of
the close of the
period, PMU will
furnish IFRs to the
World Bank
To be prepared as per the format
agreed with the World Bank for each
calendar quarter

Two sets of IFRs will prepared and
will cover separately EEPs and TA
parts, and will be supported by BERs
for the period.
Financial
Annually
Within 2 months
Financial Statements will be

Table A3.1: Financial Reporting Arrangements
Report
Frequency
Due Date &
Recipient
Remarks
Statements
of the close of the
financial year,
PMU will send the
financial
statements to the
Auditors
prepared in accordance with Cash
Basis IPSAS covering project
receipts and payments separately for
EEPs and TA for one financial year
(Jan 1 to Dec 31).

11.
Internal Controls: There are different relevant issues for the RBF and PPF/TA parts of
the loan.

12.
RBF part: The Government of Albania internal control system for expenditure is based
on a series of regulations, including the Law on Financial Management and control (2010),
Organic Budget Law (2008), and relevant permanent guides on budget execution and financial
management issued by the MoF, Civil Servants Law, Administrative Procedure Code, Labor
code, Law on the competences to determine salaries and benefits (2011), Law on Salaries,
benefits and organizational structure of independent constitutional institutions (2006), and
related CoM decisions. Overall responsibility for the control of all aspects of personnel records
and payrolls is vested with the Authorizing Officer under the Organic Budget Law.4 The team
was advised that there are specific rules regarding delegations regarding personnel and payroll
records under the General Code of ethics and Code of Administrative Procedures. Delegations
for access to these records are made to the head of Personnel Office; he/she may sub-delegate to
the Chief of the Sector or HR unit staff. There is a specific process that is established for the
recording of time worked and the calculation of amounts due as salaries, bonuses and deductions.
There is also an adequate separation of functions between HR and Finance. Budget institutions’
internal audit units include payroll audits in their high-risk category of audits. Internal auditors
regularly audit the linkages between the employee, personnel and payroll databases and
individual payrolls. Below are summarized the key controls involved.

Box A3-1:  Key Controls Relating to Payroll and Related HR Systems
 Procedures and authority for delegating, transfer and recording of the standard delegations;
 Segregation of duties in the area of payroll and HR systems providing data to support pay
activities;
 Dual signature system for payroll commitments and payments;
 Defined and controlled access to HR and payroll systems, assets and information;
 Procedures to ensure timely, accurate and complete HR and financial information employed
in payroll determination and payment;

4 Law no.9936 date 26.06.2008 on Management of Budgetary System in the Republic of Albania, article 3 and ff.

 Procedures to safeguard information and financial assets relating to the payroll process;
 Documented  monitoring and audit procedures;
 Clearly established HRM rules related to systems feeding payroll;
 Rules for documenting all transactions and activities, related to the operation of unit.

13. Based on the last PEFA assessment, the payroll systems remain by and large manual
systems, and the associated controls are manually based as well. System cannot communicate
with each other. Extensive manual reconciliations are therefore required.  The new HRMIS,
when validated and fully implemented, is expected to have a major impact of the robustness of
the payroll controls and a reduction in instances of corruption and fraud.
14.
PPF/TA part: ADISA, as a budgetary institution, has adopted the same internal
control system defined by the regulations of the MoF for budget organizations. However, no
consolidated manual exists for finance and accounts. For effective project financial management,
the mandatory project operations manual will include a section on financial management. The
FM section of the manual should contain clearly-defined control policies and procedures related
to payments verification and processing, segregation of duties, regular and timely reconciliations,
record and asset management. For each process, the FM section of the manual will define key
tasks, responsibilities, specific steps and timelines so it also serves as a benchmark for
management to measure performance. The fiduciary responsibilities for the PPF will be provided
through the Central Finance and Contracting Unit (CFCU) established under MOF, until the
ADISA/PMU is fully functional. Internal control activities for the Project will at minimum
include:
(a) Authorization and Approvals: For payments to be made under PPF and TA parts, the
financial and administrative authority will be exercised in accordance with the approved
delegation of powers.
(b) Verifications: For each payment the FM section will review that the payment claim is
appropriately supported by documents, is in compliance with approved policies and has
been approved by the competent authority.
(c) Segregation of Duties: The FM function will be independent of procurement and
administration. There will be dual bank signatories, based on Law on Financial
Management and control.
(d) Physical Controls: The CFCU and PMU will maintain a fixed assets register for assets
procured from loan proceeds. All assets will be tagged and periodically verified.
(e) Reconciliations: Bank reconciliation will be carried out on a monthly basis. Any
difference in the reconciliation will be reviewed and the reasons for the difference will be
documented.
(f) Supervisory Controls: Monthly reconciliations, physical stock verifications reports and
periodic financial reports will be reviewed by the PMU director. For PPF period the
supervisory controls will be performed by the Head of the Financial Management Sector
in CFCU.

15.
External Audit: The financial audit of this operation will consist of two parts – Annual
EEPs’ Financial Statements and the Project Financial Statements that present project operations
under PPF and TA part of the loan, The High State Control will conduct the financial audit of the
EEPs as this is part of its official work program for the audit of government.

(a) The High State Control (Albania’s Supreme Audit Institution) will carry out the annual
financial audit of the EEPs and this audit will satisfy the Bank’s annual audit
requirement. The audit will be executed in accordance with the Terms of Reference
developed jointly between the Bank and the HSC. The annual audited program financial
statements together with the audit opinion and the Management Letter will be submitted
to the Bank no later than nine months after the end of each fiscal (calendar) year – the
first audit will be due by September 30, 2016.
(b) Additionally, the financial audit of the PPF and TA parts will be executed as part of the
global (country) audit contract that is annually tendered to a private sector firm and which
covers the entire World Bank’s investment lending portfolio in Albania. The audit service
fee is covered by MoF. Specific terms of reference based on International Standards on
Auditing are used for the Projects covered by this agreement and are cleared annually by
the Bank.  The audited project financial statements will be submitted not later than six
months after the end of the reporting period. The MoH will have to disclose the audit
reports for the project within one month of their receipt from the auditors, by posting the
reports on the website. Following formal receipt of these reports, the World Bank will
make them publicly available according to World Bank Policy on Access to Information.

Audit Report Type
Due Date
Financial audit of EEPs annual financial statements for the financial year
ending on December 31 each year conducted by the High State Control
(Albania’s SAI)
September 30
each year
Financial audit of project financial statements for the TA and PPF parts of
the loan (technical assistance) for the year ending on December 31 each
year conducted by a private firm under the global (country) audit contract
covering all investment operations in Albania.
June 30 each year

16.
There are no overdue audit reports and no unsettled ineligible expenditure in respect of
implementing agencies.

Disbursements

17. The Project’s disbursement arrangements are summarized in Table A3.2.
Table A3.2:  Disbursement Arrangements
Disbursement
Categories
Amount
of Credit
(expresse
d in US$
million)
%age of
Expenditur
e to be
Financed
(inclusive
of taxes)
Disbursement Cycle
Disburseme
nt
Condition
(1) Eligible Expenditure
Program (“EEP”) – RBF
part of the loan
US$ 25
Up to 100%
in
accordance
with
provisions
of POM
Quarterly
Reimbursement of
eligible expenditure
based on confirmation
by the Bank team of
DLIs achieved and
expenditure reported in
quarterly IFRs
Achievemen
t of DLI
targets
(2) Goods, NonConsulting Services,
Consultants’ Services,
Incremental Operating
Costs, Training and
Workshops – TA part of
the loan
US$ 5
100%
Quarterly
Advance to Designated
Account, Direct
payments
None
(3) Refund of the PPF
US$ 2
100%
Quarterly
Advance to Designated
Account, Direct
payments
None
TOTAL
US$ 30

18.
Retroactive Financing of US$ 6.4 million is allowed for eligible expenditures starting
January 1, 2015 for disbursement category 1, subject to achievement of associated DLI.
19.
The loan proceeds for Category 2 will be disbursed on the basis of regular IPF
disbursement mechanism.  A Designated Account, denominated in loan currency, will be
opened at the Bank of Albania, where the Bank will advance loan proceeds.  The Bank will
require presentation of copies or originals documents evidencing eligible expenditures or
summary reports of expenditure as supporting documentation. Other available methods of
disbursement will be direct payments to third parties. Two bank accounts assigned to the project
denominated in the loan currency and local currency, respectively, will be opened to access the
disbursed funds for Category 2. These accounts will be opened at a second level bank with the
approval of the MoF. Funds from this Designated Account may be drawn down from this
account into project accounts, based on the currency of the contracts entered into, for purposes of
financing eligible expenditures under this category. The PMU will maintain accounting records

in accordance with the Financial Management Manual, part of the Project Operational Manual.
The same arrangements will apply to the PPF activities (category 3).
20.
The disbursements under RBF/Category 1 will be IFRs based and are conditional
on the achievement of reform actions or results. These are identified as Disbursement Linked
Indicators (DLIs). A certain amount of loan proceeds has been allocated to each DLI, referred as
DLI price, which is the amount that the government can claim as reimbursement against EEPs if
that DLI has been achieved and verified.
Table A3.3:  DLI Pricing and Annual Disbursement

21.
DLIs will be verified each calendar quarter and the Bank will make disbursements
on quarterly basis to the GoA Single Treasury Account consequent to the achievement and
verification of the agreed DLIs. The reimbursement method of disbursement will be used
whereby the Bank will reimburse eligible expenditures as reported in the quarterly IFRs capped
to the price of DLIs achieved. Task teams will monitor the borrower’s progress toward DLI
achievement on the basis of the agreed monitoring and reporting arrangements on quarterly
basis, including the Project’s progress reports and the DLI Verification Protocol. When a DLI
has been achieved (or partially achieved), the borrower informs the task team and provides
evidence as per the Verification Protocol as justification that the DLI has been achieved. The
task team reviews the documentation submitted and requests any additional information
considered necessary to verify achievement of the DLI. Confirmation of performance against
specific DLIs will be attested by the Bank’s Task Team, to the Borrower and will be submitted to
the World Bank as part of the withdrawal application, along with the IFRs. The frequency of
submission of such applications will be on quarterly basis. The verification protocol for the DLIs
is provided in Annex 1. If discrepancies are identified from the annual third party verification
(DLI audit), when required, between the performance as confirmed by the Bank’s Task team and
# DLI Name/ Fiscal year
FY 15 FY 16 FY 17 FY 18 FY 19 FY 20 Total
1 Number of services with level
3 automation

3.0
2.0
1.0
1.0

7.0
2 Number of key services with
business process reengineered

3.0
1.0
1.0
1.0

6.0
Number of services offered
with improved front office
interface

1.5
1.0
0.5

0.5
3.5
Number of services with
information available on
multiple platforms

1.5
0.5
0.5
0.5

0.5
3.5
Institutional prerequisites for
Citizen Centric Service
Delivery Reform Program
5.0

5.0

Total
5.0
7.5
5.0
3.5
3.0
1.0
25.0

performance as confirmed by the audit, the results will be used to adjust subsequent
disbursements. The DLI audit results are expected not later than 90 days from the end of the
year.
22.
For each year, the amount eligible for disbursement will be equivalent to the price
of the DLIs achieved as given in the table A3.3 above. Where achievement of a DLI cannot be
verified, an amount equivalent to the price of that DLI will be withheld. This amount may be
paid at any later date when such achievement can be verified by the Bank.
23.
The indicative schedule for DLI-based disbursements under the RBF part of the loan
is presented in Table A3.4.
24.
Eligible Expenditure Programs (EEPs). Under RBF part, the Bank will finance, up to a
capped amount and subject to any deductions equivalent to the price of unmet DLIs, particular
expenditures which constitute sizeable recurrent expenditures that would have an impact on
agreed results (DLIs) and outcomes.

Table A3.4:  Indicative Disbursement Schedule – DLI-Based Disbursement

Performance &
IFRs Period
No. of
DLIs to
be
Achieved
Submission of DLIs
progress report to the
Bank along with
quarterly IFR & WA
Verification and
Agreement on
Annual DLI
Results between
the Bank and
Govt.
Amount to
be
Disbursed
each year
(US$
million)
From Jan 1 credit
signature

One month of
project
effectiveness

Project signing till
Dec, 2015
February 15, 2016
February 28, 2016
Jan – Dec , 2016
not later than 45 days
from the end of each
quarter
March 31, 2017
7.5
Jan – Dec, 2017
not later than 45 days
from the end of each
quarter
March 31, 2018
Jan – Dec, 2018
not later than 45 days
from the end of each
quarter
March 31, 2019
3.5
Jan – Dec, 2019
not later than 45 days
from the end of each
quarter
March 31, 2020
3.0
Jan – Jun, 2020
not later than 45 days
from the end of each
quarter
September 30,
1.0

TOTAL

25.
EEPs for this project are salaries and social security contributions of the identified
units (see Tables A3.5a and A3.5b). The reporting will be on cash basis and denominated in
Albanian Lek. The direct responsibility for salaries and social security contributions lies with the
Principal Authorizing Officer and Executing officer of the institutions where expenditures are
incurred. In case of budgetary institutions, salaries are processed through the government’s FMIS
and are subject to overall payroll controls which are considered adequate. Amounts are
transferred by the Treasury to the personal bank accounts of employees. In case of public non
budgetary institutions salaries are processed through institutions’ bank accounts and are subject
to overall payroll controls imposed by management in accordance with the laws and regulation.
In both cases, net salaries are transferred to the employee bank account, while PIT and social
security contributions to assigned accounts of the tax administration in the second level banks.

Table A3.5a:  Eligible Expenditure Program – budgetary institutions
Agency –
Budgetary
Institutions
Line
ministry /
Institution
code
Object
Code &
Description
Program
Code
Program Description
Ministry of
Interior
16 /
Municipality
codes
600 Salaries
601 Social
Security
Contribution
01170
Civil Register records
National
Agency for
Information
Society
600 Salaries
601 Social
Security
Contribution
01140
Information Society
Services
Agency for
Delivery of
Integrated
Services in
Albania
(ADISA)
600 Salaries
601 Social
Security
Contribution
01160
General Public Services II

Table A3.5b: Eligible Expenditure Program – public non budgetary institutions
Agency
–
Public
Non-Budgetary
Institutions
Object Code & Description
Immovable Property Registration Office
600 Salaries and
601 Social Security Contribution

Procurement

26. Procurement risk rating is high.  Additional capacity assessment will be conducted once
the PMU is set up. The following measures were agreed to mitigate the risks and maintain the
implementing team’s capacity:
Table A3-6. Procurement Risks

Description of Risk
Risk
Rating
Mitigation Measures
Residual
Risk
Rating
Very weak procurement capacity
at ADISA as a newly created
agency.
H
The PMU will be established
under the PPF and the
following staff will comprise
the PMU: Project Manager,
Procurement Specialist,
Financial Management
Specialist and Administrative
Specialist.
Bank team will provide
sample TORs to the PMU,
which in-house experts can
use to formulate TORs for the
selection of consultants under
the project.
Close involvement of Bank
technical expert in the review
of the TOR for hiring such
consultants.
M
Weak implementation capacity at
ADISA

H
A Project Operational Manual
will be prepared by ADISA
with guidance from the Task
Team.

M

27. Procurement under the proposed Project will be carried out in accordance with the
World Bank’s Guidelines: “Procurement of Goods, Works, and Non-Consulting Services Under
IBRD Loans and IDA Credits & Grants by World Bank Borrowers” (January 2011, revised July
2014) and “Guidelines Selection and Employment of Consultants Under IBRD Loans and IDA
Credits & Grants by World Bank Borrowers” (January 2011, revised July 2014), and the
provisions stipulated in the Legal Agreement.  The World Bank Guidelines on Preventing and
Combating Fraud and Corruption in Projects Financed by IBRD Loans and IDA Credit and
Grants dated October 15, 2006 and revised on January 2011, would also apply.

28. A Project Operational Manual (POM) will be prepared to provide ADISA and other
project stakeholders with a clear overview of objectives and the division of responsibilities

to ensure coordination and the effective, efficient, and timely execution of the proposed project.
The POM will provide detailed information on project components, as well as practical guidance
for project implementation, including the procurement and financial management arrangements.
29. Procurement will be carried out in accordance with the World Bank’s Guidelines:
“Guidelines: Procurement of Goods, Works, and Non-Consulting Services under IBRD Loans
and IDA Credits & Grants” dated January 2011 (revised July 2014); and “Guidelines: Selection
and Employment of Consultants under IBRD Loans and IDA Credits & Grants by World Bank
Borrowers” dated January 2011 (revised July 2014); and the provisions stipulated in the Loan
Agreement. The World Bank Guidelines on Preventing and Combating Fraud and Corruption in
Projects Financed by IBRD Loans and IDA Credit and Grants dated October 15, 2006 and
revised on January 2011, would also apply.
30. World Bank Guidelines apply to the PPF and TA portions of the loan only. RBF part of
the proposed loan will only co-finance salaries and social security contributions against DLIs and
will not include any procurement activities. PPF and TA parts of the proposed loan will involve
financing of goods, minor works, consulting services, non-consulting services, PMU staffing and
operational costs.
31. Consulting Services.  Consulting services will include the following activities:  ICT
Infrastructure and Integration, Case Management System, public awareness campaign, call
center operators, training services, etc.  The following methods may be used for the selection of
consultants' services as set forth in the Consultant Guidelines for their use: Quality and CostBased Selection (QCBS), Quality-Based Selection (QBS), Least-Cost Selection (LCS), Fixed
Budget Selection (FBS), Selection based on Consultants Qualifications (CQS), Individual
Consultant
Selection
(IC),
and
Single
Source
Selection
(SSS).

32. Goods and Minor Works.  Goods to be procured include furniture for the call centers,
software and hardware.  Minor works are only for refurbishment of call centers. The following
methods may be used for procurement of goods as set forth in the Procurement Guidelines for
their use: International Competitive Bidding (ICB), National Competitive Bidding (NCB),
Shopping (SH), and Direct Contracting (DC).  For minor works, NCB, SH or DC may be used.
DC is subject to meeting the conditions specified in the Guidelines.

33. Procurement/Selection Methods and Prior Review Thresholds are listed in Table A3-7
below.  The thresholds maybe changed during project implementation based on the performance
of the PMU.

Table A3-7:  Selection Methods and Prior Review Thresholds
Procurement/Selection
Method
Procurement/Selection
Threshold (US$)
Prior Review Threshold
ICB
500,000
(Goods);
5M
(Works)
All
NCB
< 500,000 (Goods); <5M (Works)
First package for each
category

Table A3-7:  Selection Methods and Prior Review Thresholds
Procurement/Selection
Method
Procurement/Selection
Threshold (US$)
Prior Review Threshold
SH
<$100,000 (Goods and Minor
Works)
First package for each
category
DC
None
All
QCBS
>=$300,000
$200,000
QBS, FBS, LCS, CQS
<$300,000
$200,000
IC
<$100,000
First assignment
SSS
None
All

34. Review by the Bank of Procurement Decisions. The short list may comprise entirely of
national consultants (firms registered or incorporated in the country), if the assignment is below
the ceiling of US$300,000 established in the Procurement Plan approved by the Bank.    All
Terms of Reference irrespective of cost estimate will be subject to Bank’s prior review. All
procurement related documentation that requires Bank's prior review will be cleared by the
Procurement Accredited Staff (PAS) assigned to the project and relevant technical staff.  No
packages above mandatory review thresholds by the RPM are anticipated.

35. Procurement Plan.  The Borrower has developed at appraisal the initial Procurement Plan of
activities to be implemented under the TA portion of the loan.  Each update of the procurement
plan will be subject to Bank’s prior review.  The initial procurement plan, together with the
subsequent updates, will be published in the Bank’s external website in line with the
requirements of the Consultant Guidelines.  A summary of the procurement plan is in Table A38.

36. Post-review Percentages and Frequency.  In addition to the supervision to be carried out
during the Bank team’s supervision mission, post review by the Bank’ procurement specialist
will be carried out on a sample basis (15 percent of number of contracts) once per year.
Physical inspection will also be conducted for at least 10 percent of the contracts.

37. Procurement Files.  The PMU will maintain complete procurement files, which will be
reviewed by Bank supervision missions. All procurement related documentation that requires the
Bank’s prior review will be cleared by the Procurement Specialist and relevant technical staff.

38. General Procurement Notice (GPN).  A General Procurement Notice (GPN) covering the
project procurement activities of the TA component will be prepared and published after
negotiations

Table A3-8. Procurement Plan

Contract Description
 Total Cost USD
 Total Cost  Estimate
in USD including
taxes
 Type
No. of
packages
Selection/Procure
ment Method
Bank Review
(ToR/
Request for
Proposals/Bi
dding
Documents)
 IT Solutions
 $          1,677,650  $         2,013,180
1.1.1 International Expert
 $                       132,300  $                      158,760
 CS
CQS
Prior
1.1.2 Local Expert
 $                       185,220  $                      222,264
 CS
CQS
Prior
1.1.3 Infrastructure / DC + Terminals
 $                       200,000  $                      240,000
 G
Multiple
Shopping
Prior
1.1.4 Networking / extension GOVNET
 $                       400,000  $                      480,000
 G
Multiple
Shopping
Prior
1.2.1 International Expert
 $                       132,300  $                      158,760
CS
CQS
Prior
1.2.2 Local Expert
 $                       277,830  $                      333,396
CS
QCBS
Prior
1.2.3 Hardware Improvement for Gov Cloud in order to host Cases for
min 2 year work
 $                       200,000  $                      240,000
G
CQS
Prior
1.2.4 CMS COTS Software
 $                         90,000  $                      108,000
G
NCB
Prior
1.2.5 CMS COTS Software customization
 $                         60,000  $                        72,000
CS
Shopping
Prior
Front Office Management and Operations
 $          1,966,880  $         2,020,656
2.1.1 Trainings
 $                         33,600  $                        40,320
 CS
Multiple
Shopping
Prior
2.1.2 Exchange visits
 $                         24,000  $                        24,000
 TR
Multiple
TR
Prior
2.2.1 Call Center Operators (Staff and Running Costs)
 $                       345,600  $                      357,120
 CS
Multiple
IC
Prior
2.2.2 Call Center hardware and software
 $                         36,000  $                        43,200
 G
Shopping
Prior
2.2.3 Call Center furniture
 $                         20,000  $                        24,000
 G
Shopping
Prior
2.2.4 Call Center minor refurbishment
 $                         15,000  $                        18,000
 W
Multiple
Shopping
Prior
2.3.1 Service/Business Processes Manual
 $                         73,920  $                        88,704
 CS
IC
Prior
2.3.2 Staff Performance Monitoring (Mystery Shoppers)
 $                         20,160  $                        24,192
 CQ
Shopping
Prior
2.3.3 Focus Groups with Citizens
 $                         12,600  $                        15,120
 CQ
Shopping
Prior
2.4 Front Office Management Support
 $                       630,000  $                      630,000
CS
QCBS
Prior
2.4.1 Management International Staff
 $                       756,000  $                      756,000
CS
QCBS
Prior
Public Outreach
 $             247,000  $            296,400
 Public awareness campaing
 $                       247,000  $                      296,400
 CS
QC
Prior
Monitoring and Evaluation
 $             220,000  $            264,000
Target attainment survey
 $                       120,000  $                      144,000
 CS
QC
Prior
Monitoring
 $                       100,000  $                      120,000
 CS
QC
Prior
Project Management and Logistical Support
 $             305,764  $            305,764
PMU Manager
 $                         76,800  $                        76,800
CS
IC
Prior
Finance Specialist
 $                         57,600  $                        57,600
CS
IC
Prior
Administrative Specialist
 $                         28,800  $                        28,800
CS
IC
Prior
Procurement Specialist
 $                         52,800  $                        52,800
CS
IC
Prior
Incremental Operating Costs
 $                         89,764  $                        89,764
IOC
multiple
IOC
Prior
Capacity Building
 $        100,000.00  $       100,000.00
Capacity Building
 $                  100,000.00  $                 100,000.00
 CS
multiple
IC
Prior
 GRAND  TOTAL  (USD)
 $          4,517,294  $         5,000,000

Contract Description
 Total Cost USD
 Total Cost  Estimate
in USD including
taxes
 Type
No. of
packages
Selection/Procure
ment Method
Bank Review
(ToR/
Request for
Proposals/Bi
dding
Documents)
 IT Solutions
 $          1,677,650  $         2,013,180
1.1.1 International Expert
 $                       132,300  $                      158,760
 CS
CQS
Prior
1.1.2 Local Expert
 $                       185,220  $                      222,264
 CS
CQS
Prior
1.1.3 Infrastructure / DC + Terminals
 $                       200,000  $                      240,000
 G
Multiple
Shopping
Prior
1.1.4 Networking / extension GOVNET
 $                       400,000  $                      480,000
 G
Multiple
Shopping
Prior
1.2.1 International Expert
 $                       132,300  $                      158,760
CS
CQS
Prior
1.2.2 Local Expert
 $                       277,830  $                      333,396
CS
QCBS
Prior
1.2.3 Hardware Improvement for Gov Cloud in order to host Cases for
min 2 year work
 $                       200,000  $                      240,000
G
CQS
Prior
1.2.4 CMS COTS Software
 $                         90,000  $                      108,000
G
NCB
Prior
1.2.5 CMS COTS Software customization
 $                         60,000  $                        72,000
CS
Shopping
Prior
Front Office Management and Operations
 $          1,966,880  $         2,020,656
2.1.1 Trainings
 $                         33,600  $                        40,320
 CS
Multiple
Shopping
Prior
2.1.2 Exchange visits
 $                         24,000  $                        24,000
 TR
Multiple
TR
Prior
2.2.1 Call Center Operators (Staff and Running Costs)
 $                       345,600  $                      357,120
 CS
Multiple
IC
Prior
2.2.2 Call Center hardware and software
 $                         36,000  $                        43,200
 G
Shopping
Prior
2.2.3 Call Center furniture
 $                         20,000  $                        24,000
 G
Shopping
Prior
2.2.4 Call Center minor refurbishment
 $                         15,000  $                        18,000
 W
Multiple
Shopping
Prior
2.3.1 Service/Business Processes Manual
 $                         73,920  $                        88,704
 CS
IC
Prior
2.3.2 Staff Performance Monitoring (Mystery Shoppers)
 $                         20,160  $                        24,192
 CQ
Shopping
Prior
2.3.3 Focus Groups with Citizens
 $                         12,600  $                        15,120
 CQ
Shopping
Prior
2.4 Front Office Management Support
 $                       630,000  $                      630,000
CS
QCBS
Prior
2.4.1 Management International Staff
 $                       756,000  $                      756,000
CS
QCBS
Prior
Public Outreach
 $             247,000  $            296,400
 Public awareness campaing
 $                       247,000  $                      296,400
 CS
QC
Prior
Monitoring and Evaluation
 $             220,000  $            264,000
Target attainment survey
 $                       120,000  $                      144,000
 CS
QC
Prior
Monitoring
 $                       100,000  $                      120,000
 CS
QC
Prior
Project Management and Logistical Support
 $             305,764  $            305,764
PMU Manager
 $                         76,800  $                        76,800
CS
IC
Prior
Finance Specialist
 $                         57,600  $                        57,600
CS
IC
Prior
Administrative Specialist
 $                         28,800  $                        28,800
CS
IC
Prior
Procurement Specialist
 $                         52,800  $                        52,800
CS
IC
Prior
Incremental Operating Costs
 $                         89,764  $                        89,764
IOC
multiple
IOC
Prior
Capacity Building
 $        100,000.00  $       100,000.00
Capacity Building
 $                  100,000.00  $                 100,000.00
 CS
multiple
IC
Prior
 GRAND  TOTAL  (USD)
 $          4,517,294  $         5,000,000

Environmental and Social (including safeguards)

39.
Since under Phase 2 a new building for the CSC will be constructed, the operational
policy OP 4.01 has been triggered and the project has subsequently been categorized as a
World Bank Category B. As such, the Client has prepared an Environmental Management Plan
satisfactory to the Bank complete with disclosure and public consultations held in April 2015.
The EMP includes mitigation and monitoring measures for construction-related impacts such as
land use, noise and dust, waste management and worker safety that can readily be mitigated
through sound construction practices. In case of the change of the selected building site at a later
date, the EMP will be adequately revised.

40. The project does not trigger OP/BP 4.12 as the physical building for the CSC will be
constructed in publically owned land that is neither used in private nor for public purpose.
The project aims to improve the administrative public services and decrease the corruption by
isolating a real provider of the service and the citizen as a customer.

41.
Project stakeholders include:  Government of Albania, Ministry of State for Innovation
and Public Administration, DU, ADISA, NAIS, IPRO, Social Insurance Institute, National
Employment Service, and General Directorate of Civil Status and other government agencies.  A
brief summary of relevant stakeholder concerns is provided below:

(a) Borrower/Government: There is high level of political ownership of the Project.
Regardless of leadership, institutional reforms can be expected to be met with caution at
the agency level, if not opposition.
(b) Prime Minister’s DU has been set up to monitor several key prime ministers priorities,
one of which is improvement in administrative services to eradicate petty corruption and
improve citizen convenience. Its key focus will be keeping the Prime Minister informed
of the project progress, develop and implement performance management tools, and
facilitate high level of coordination.
(c) ADISA is new and in the process of strengthening its capacities under the enhanced
mandate based on the Council of Ministers Decision dated May 27, 2015.
(d) NAIS leads the traditional E-Albania agenda for the government which involves
interoperability and back end management of databases, provision of e-services,
management of E-Albania portal and provision of advice to the Council of Ministers and
the Prime Minister.
(e) Immovable Property Registration Office has long faced service delivery quality issues.
The problem is compounded by the legal complications in the property registers. The
field level staff is likely to resist the reform.
(f) National Health Insurance, Civil Records, Employment Service and Pension Agencies are
the core agencies interfacing with citizens. Their systems are going to be automated and
direct citizen interaction reduced and improved. Given the spread of their services across
the country, coordination with these agencies will be a key issue. Some employees may
even resist reform efforts.

(g) Citizens and Business: Citizen and business groups are key beneficiaries of the reform
process. However, to gain and sustain interest and enthusiasm among these scattered
constituencies, especially when some disruption in service may happen also, strong
communication effort will have to be organized and implemented.
42.
One of the key contributions of the project is to ensure that the marginalized, the
poorest and women would be better served by the new systems as well as how their voices
are heard.  The emphasis is on increasing access: not only constructing the new high-end one
stop shop in Tirana, but also keep the existing points of service access and facilitate new
ones.  One of the PDO indicators will track the access of disadvantaged and the poor. In addition,
the citizen feedback mechanism for the selected services will be established, and the responses
from all citizens will be disaggregated and controlled to distinguish customers based on gender,
income as well the remoteness from the regional center.  As the overall focus of the project is
improved citizen access to public services this issue will be assessed in detail during the
preparation stage and necessary strategies will be put in place as part of the overall project
design. The project is designed based on the guiding principles of inclusiveness, transparency
and accountability.
43.
A development plan for facilitated services to women, poor, ethnic Roma and other
marginalized groups will  be prepared as part of the project’s effort to facilitate access to
services among these groups and foster social inclusion. The plan is expected to draw upon
the existing database of ongoing programs, reports and studies from other projects supported by
Bank in the state, studies commissioned by the state and stakeholder consultations. The Plan will
be disclosed before appraisal.
Monitoring & Evaluation
44.
The Project has a strong monitoring and evaluation focus. Third party validations,
wherever appropriate, will also be deployed to verify the DLI results. The capacity of the
designated Project Management Unit will also be enhanced for effective monitoring and
evaluation of Project activities. The project will incorporate improved mechanisms to monitor
Project implementation, compliance with the established procurement and financial management
procedures, and achievement of Project performance indicators included in Annex 1.  Monitoring
instruments include bi-annual progress reports on Project implementation, output and
performance indicators, and an annual external assessment of compliance with DLI and PDO
indicators. New policy focus on using data for performance management and beneficiary
feedback will also strengthen country monitoring and evaluation systems. The support to the
Prime Minister’s DU will help focus on improving administrative data for performance
management.
Grievance Redress Mechanism
45.
A Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) will be established following the World
Bank policy. This will be led by the head of PMU. A focal person in each implementing agency
will be identified to deter fraud and corruption, mitigate risks, and provide project staff with
practical suggestions and feedback to enable them to be more accountable, transparent, and
responsive to beneficiary needs. Proactive collection of feedback from citizens will also facilitate
focus on systemic issues and redress such problems.

Role of Partners
46.
Development partners are supporting the Innovation against Corruption reform
program, and GoA is contributing its own financing.  GoA has used its own budget resources
for the legal and process mapping of the core services and has budgeted US$25 million, to be
allocated by the MIPA, for various e-governance initiatives.  In addition, the Government of
Kuwait is funding a consultancy firm, embedded as advisors within the DU.  Under RBF, the
IBRD loan of US$25 million constitutes 18 percent of the total salary and wage bill of the
participating agencies.  As for technical assistance, other development partners, such as EU,
UNDP, and multi-donor trust fund administered by the World Bank (IPS II) will finance
activities related to the implementation of the GoA program “Innovation against Corruption.”
Detailed costing of the program including sources of funding will be contained in the GoA’s
Reform Policy Document to be approved by the Strategic Planning Committee.
.

Annex 4:  Implementation Support Plan
ALBANIA:  Citizen Centric Service Delivery Project

Strategy and Approach for Implementation Support
1.
The strategy and approach for the Implementation Support Plan (ISP) reflect the
support requirements to implement risk mitigation measures and achieve the Project
Development Objectives. The design of the Project and its implementation arrangements aim to
respond to the risks identified below through the following measures and arrangements:
(a)  Limited experience with Results-Based Lending: GoA has limited experience with
results-based lending. As a result, the counterpart requires targeted support, training and a
close and steady communication with the Bank team on project implementation
mechanisms and processes. The Government of Albania was closely involved in the
design and preparation of the Project.
(b) Limited knowledge on the Bank’s fiduciary rules in particular procurement. The MIPA
and the two key agencies, ADISA and NAIS, have limited experience with the Bank’s
fiduciary rules and have never carried out procurement processes under the Bank’s
guidelines. PMU will receive training on the Bank’s procurement guidelines and will
extend its fiduciary team by hiring additional specialists for financial management and
procurement. The Bank’s procurement specialist will be able to quickly react to requests
for support from PMU, in particular in the beginning of the Project for PPF and TA
utilization.
(c) Coordination among the different departments and agencies involved in the Project. The
PMU in the MIPA will be in charge of centrally managing all fiduciary aspects and the
monitoring and reporting of compliance of DLIs and the results framework. This unit will
also serve as the main counterpart with the Bank and facilitate all communication and
reporting. To facilitate coordination among participant institutions, the Steering
Committee for the Project will be established. Similarly, on the Bank side, the project
team is comprised of specialists from all relevant sectors and implementation will be
coordinated by the public sector team.
(d) Need to strengthen M&E systems and ensuring monitoring of DLI compliance. To
facilitate the monitoring of progress and DLI compliance, most indicators have been
designed to use available information to establish the baseline and to easily gather
information on their progress. However, if baseline is not available for some indicators, it
will be established during the first year of implementation through activities under the
technical assistance component. In addition, technical assistance will be provided to
strengthen the monitoring system so all DLIs and PDO indicators and other indicators
can be monitored through the government systems.
(e) Close supervision and support through country-based staff. The fiduciary staff is mostly
based in Tirana. Cross-region teams have been built to provide preparation support. Local
senior operations officer has been a core member of the team. Other team members will
provide support from the head quarter.

2. Specific measures have also been considered to guarantee sound fiduciary and
safeguard oversight:
(a) Procurement. Procurement implementation support by the Bank will include: (i)
providing training to PMU, (ii) providing detailed guidance on the Bank’s Procurement
Guidelines to the Procurement staff, (iii) reviewing procurement documents and
providing timely feedback to the Procurement staff, and (iv) monitoring procurement
progress against the Procurement Plan.
(b) Financial management. The Bank supervision team will: (i) provide training to PMU
Financial Management Unit and the Project team; and (ii) regularly review the Project’s
financial management system and its adherence to the Project Operations Manual,
including but not limited to, accounting, reporting and internal controls.

Implementation Support Plan
3. Implementation will be supported by the Bank team through the following activities:
(a) General Supervision inputs. There will be two formal missions per year complemented
by a regular liaison by Tirana-based staff to respond to upcoming demands by the
Government. In addition, team members based in the country office and at headquarters
will provide day to day supervision support of all operational aspects, as well as
coordination with the client and among Bank team members.
(b) Fiduciary inputs. Training will be provided by the Bank’s financial management and
procurement specialists before the beginning of Project implementation. The Bank team
will continue to support PMU to identify capacity building needs to strengthen overall
Project implementation, with an emphasis on fiduciary aspects. Formal supervision of
Project implementation and financial management will be carried out semi-annually or
as needed, while procurement supervision will be carried out on a timely basis as
required by the client.
(c)  Sector & Technical inputs. The sector specialists for e-governance, business process
reform, citizen engagement will provide continuous advice in their areas of expertise
during implementation. The objective of the team is to maintain continuity and a regular
dialogue between the Government counterparts and the technical specialists. The main
focus of implementation support is summarized below.

Time
Focus
Skills Needed
Resource
Estimate
(Annual)
Partner
Role
First
twelve
months
Technical Review/Support
Regulatory Reform
Specialist
Public Sector
Reform Specialists
4 SWs

6 SWs

Participate
in training
FM training and supervision
FM Specialist
4 SWs
Participate
in training
Institutional arrangement and
project supervision
coordination
Operations Officer
8 SWs
NA
Team leadership
TTL
12 SWs
NA
12-60
months
Technical Review/Support

Regulatory Reform
Specialist
Public Sector
Reform Specialists
4 SWs

4 SWs

Participate
in training
FM training and supervision
Procurement Training and
Supervision

FM Specialist

4 SWs

NA

NA
Institutional arrangement and
project supervision
coordination
Operations Officer

4 SWs
NA
Team leadership
TTL
8 SWs
NA
SW= staff week

Skills Mix Required
Skills Needed
Number of Staff
Weeks
Number of Trips
Comments
TTL
8 SWs annually
Three (annually)
HQ based
FM Specialist
4 SWs annually
Field trips as
required
Country office based
Procurement
Specialist
4 SWs annually
Field trips as
required
Country office based
Public Sector
Management
Specialist
4 SWs annually
Field Trips as
required
HQ based
Operations Officer
8 SWs annually
Field trips as
required
Country office based
