===== SOURCE FILE: BOSIB1880fe45718f53145911a39814e74692b3c33.pdf =====

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Report No: PAD5281

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT
PROGRAM APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
ON A
PROPOSED LOAN

IN THE AMOUNT OF US$300 MILLION

TO

INDIA

FOR THE
CHHATTISGARH: ACCELERATED LEARNING FOR A KNOWLEDGE-ECONOMY OPERATION

June 2, 2023

Education Global Practice
South Asia Region

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of
their official duties.  Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized

Chhattisgarh: Accelerated Learning for a Knowledge-Economy (P179249)

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS

(Exchange Rate Effective {April 31, 2023})

Currency Unit =   India Rupee
INR 81.79 =  US$1

INR 1 = US$0.01

FISCAL YEAR
April 1 – March 31

Regional Vice President: Martin Raiser
Regional Director: Lynne D. Sherburne-Benz
Country Director: Auguste Tano Kouame
Practice Manager: Keiko Inoue
Task Team Leader(s): Kartik Pental, Shobhana Sosale, and Supriti Dua

Chhattisgarh: Accelerated Learning for a Knowledge-Economy (P179249)

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

AWP&B
Annual Work Plan & Budget
CAGR
Compounded Annual Growth Rate
CHALK
Chhattisgarh: Accelerated Learning for a Knowledge Economy
CPF
Country Partnership Framework
CSIDC
Chhattisgarh State Industrial Development Corporation Ltd.
DIET
District Institute of Education and Training
DLI
Disbursement Linked Indicator
DLR
Disbursement Linked Result
DoFP
Delegation of Financial Powers
DoSE
Department of School Education
DoSE&L
Department of School Education and Literacy
DRM
Disaster Risk Management
E&S
Environmental and Social
ECE
Early Childhood Education
e-GP
e-Government Procurement
EMIS
Education Management Information System
ESCP
Environmental and Social Commitment Plan
ESS
Environmental and Social Standards
ESSA
Environmental and Social Systems Assessment
FD
Finance Department
GER
Gross Enrolment Ratio
GoCG
Government of Chhattisgarh
GoI
Government of India
GRM
Grievance Redressal Mechanism
GRS
Grievance Redress Service
IFSA
Integrated Fiduciary Systems Assessment
IPF
Investment Project Financing
IPF-TA
Investment Project Financing - Technical Assistance
IUFR
Interim Unaudited Financial Reports
IVA
Independent Verification Agency
MoE
Ministry of Education
MSME
Micro, Small and Medieum Enterprises
NAS
National Achievement Survey
NEP
New Education Policy
OBC
Other Backward Classes
PAB
Project Approval Board
PFM
Public Financial Management
PforR
Program for Results
PMC
Project Management Consultant
PPSD
Project Procurement Strategy for Development
PWD
Public Works Department
RES
Rural Engineering Services
SAC
SCERT Assessment Cell
SC
Scheduled Caste
SCERT
State Council of Education Research and Training
SIEMAT
State Institute of Education Management and Training

Chhattisgarh: Accelerated Learning for a Knowledge-Economy (P179249)

SIS-SS
State Implementation Society for Samagra Shiksha
SLAS
State Level Achievement Survey
SMC
School Management Committee
SNA
Single Nodal Account
SRGBV
School Related Gender Based Violence
SS
Samagra Shiksha
ST
Scheduled Tribe
STEP
Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement
TaRL
Teaching at the Right Level

Chhattisgarh: Accelerated Learning for a Knowledge-Economy (P179249)

TABLE OF CONTENTS

DATASHEET........................................................................................................................................1
I.
STRATEGIC CONTEXT ..................................................................................................................1
A. Country Context .....................................................................................................................1
B. Sectoral (or Multi-Sectoral) and Institutional Context ..............................................................1
C. Relationship to the CPS/CPF and Rationale for Use of Instrument ............................................4
II.
PROGRAM DESCRIPTION .............................................................................................................5
A.
Government program ..........................................................................................................5
B.
Theory of Change ................................................................................................................5
C.
PforR Program Scope ...........................................................................................................6
D.
Program Development Objective(s) (PDO) and PDO Level Results Indicators ....................... 12
E.
Disbursement Linked Indicators and Verification Protocols ................................................ 13
III. PROGRAM IMPLEMENTATION .................................................................................................. 13
A.
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements ................................................................ 13
B.
Results Monitoring and Evaluation .................................................................................... 14
C.
Disbursement Arrangements ............................................................................................. 14
D.
Capacity Building ............................................................................................................... 15
IV. ASSESSMENT SUMMARY .......................................................................................................... 15
A.
Technical (including program economic evaluation) ........................................................... 16
B.
Fiduciary ........................................................................................................................... 17
C.
Environmental and Social .................................................................................................. 19
V.
RISKS ........................................................................................................................................ 22
ANNEX 1. RESULTS FRAMEWORK MATRIX ........................................................................................ 23
ANNEX 2. DISBURSEMENT LINKED INDICATORS, DISBURSEMENT ARRANGEMENTS AND VERIFICATION
PROTOCOLS ..................................................................................................................................... 29
ANNEX 3. (SUMMARY) TECHNICAL ASSESSMENT .............................................................................. 40
ANNEX 4. (SUMMARY) FIDUCIARY SYSTEMS ASSESSMENT ................................................................ 44
ANNEX 5. SUMMARY ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SYSTEMS ASSESSMENT .................................... 49
ANNEX 6. PROGRAM ACTION PLAN .................................................................................................. 51
ANNEX 7. IMPLEMENTATION SUPPORT PLAN ................................................................................... 53
ANNEX 8. INVESTMENT PROJECT FINANCING COMPONENT .............................................................. 54

Chhattisgarh: Accelerated Learning for a Knowledge-Economy (P179249)

I

DATASHEET

BASIC INFORMATION
 BASIC INFO TABLE
Country(ies)
Project Name
India
Chhattisgarh: Accelerated Learning for a Knowledge-Economy
Project ID
Financing Instrument
Does this operation have
an IPF component?
Environmental and Social Risk
Classification (IPF Component)
P179249
Program-for-Results
Financing
Yes
Low

Financing & Implementation Modalities
[  ] Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA)
[  ] Fragile State(s)
[  ] Contingent Emergency Response Component  (CERC)
[  ] Fragile within a non-fragile Country
[  ] Small State(s)
[  ] Conflict
[  ] Alternate Procurement Arrangements (APA)
[  ] Responding to Natural or Man-made Disaster
[  ] Hands-on Enhanced Implementation Support (HEIS)

Expected Project Approval Date
Expected Closing Date
26-Jun-2023
29-Sep-2028
Bank/IFC Collaboration
No

Proposed Program Development Objective(s)

To improve the quality of school education & access to science & commerce senior secondary education

Organizations

Borrower :

India

Implementing Agency :
State of Chhattisgarh
Contact:
Alok Shukla
Title:
Principal Secretary, Department of School Education

Chhattisgarh: Accelerated Learning for a Knowledge-Economy (P179249)

II

Telephone No:
0771-2443696
Email:
shukalok@ias.nic.in

COST & FINANCING

FIN_SUMM_WITH_IPF
SUMMARY

Government program Cost
9,764.50
Total Operation Cost
558.30
Total Program Cost
535.80
IPF Component
21.75
Other Costs
0.75
Total Financing
558.30
Financing Gap
0.00

Financing (USD Millions)
       Counterpart Funding
258.30
            Borrower/Recipient
     258.30
       International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)
300.00

Expected Disbursements (USD Millions)

Fiscal
Year
Absolu
te
   0.00
 113.00
  50.90
  64.60
  35.10
  36.40
   0.00
Cumula
tive
   0.00
 113.00
 163.90
 228.50
 263.60
 300.00
 300.00

INSTITUTIONAL DATA
 INSTITUTIONAL DATA TBL
Practice Area (Lead)
Contributing Practice Areas
Education

Chhattisgarh: Accelerated Learning for a Knowledge-Economy (P179249)

IV

ESStandards
Environmental and Social Standards Relevance Given its Context at the Time of Appraisal
E & S Standards
Relevance
Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and Impacts
Relevant
Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure
Relevant
Labor and Working Conditions
Relevant
Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management
Relevant
Community Health and Safety
Not Currently Relevant
Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement
Not Currently Relevant
Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural
Resources
Not Currently Relevant
Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved Traditional
Local Communities
Relevant
Cultural Heritage
Not Currently Relevant
Financial Intermediaries
Not Currently Relevant

ESStandardsNote
NOTE: For further information regarding the World Bank’s due diligence assessment of the Project’s potential
environmental and social risks and impacts, please refer to the Project’s Appraisal Environmental and Social Review
Summary (ESRS).

Legal Covenants

 Sections and Description
1. Section I.B.1(a), Schedule to the Operations Agreement (OA): The Implementing Entity shall vest the overall
responsibility for implementation, management, and monitoring and evaluation of the Operation in the SIS, which
shall implement the Operation with the assistance of SCERT, SIEMAT, DIETs, PWD and RES. | 2. Section I.B.1(b),
Schedule to the OA: The Implementing Entity shall recruit, and maintain throughout the period of the Operation, a
Project Management Consultant (PMC), comprising of experienced and qualified personnel, in sufficient numbers
and under terms of reference acceptable to the Bank, which shall be responsible for day-to-day implementation
and monitoring of the Operation, including, inter alia: (a) monitoring the results under each Results Area under
the Program; (b) monitoring compliance with social and environmental obligations; and (c) preparing progress
reports and ensuring their timely submission to the Bank. | 3. Section III.B, Schedule to the OA: The Implementing
Entity shall: (1) maintain, at all times during the implementation of the Program, one or more Independent
Verification Agent(s) under terms of reference acceptable to the Bank, to verify the data and other evidence
supporting the achievement of one or more DLRs as set forth in the table in Schedule 4 to this Agreement and

Chhattisgarh: Accelerated Learning for a Knowledge-Economy (P179249)

V

recommend corresponding payments to be made, as applicable; and (2) ensure that the Independent Verification
Agent(s) carries out verification and process(es) in accordance with the Verification Protocol; and (ii) submits to
the Bank the corresponding verification reports in a timely manner and in form and substance satisfactory to the
Bank, prior to submission of any withdrawal application under Categories (1) to (9) of the table in Section IV.A of
Schedule 2 to the Loan Agreement. | 4. Section III.C, Schedule to the OA: The Implementing Entity shall: (a) ensure
that the Operation’s activities involving collection, storage, usage, and/or processing of Personal Data are carried
out with due regard to the Borrower’s existing legal framework & appropriate international data protection and
privacy standards and practices and ensure legitimate, appropriate and proportionate treatment of such data; (b)
in the event that, during the implementation of the Operation, the approval of any new legislation regarding
Personal Data protection may have an impact on the activities financed by the Operation, ensure that a technical
analysis of said impact is conducted, & that the necessary recommendations concluding the assessment and
adjustments deemed necessary to efficiently protect Personal Data, are implemented, as appropriate; and (c)
except as may otherwise be explicitly required or permitted under this Agreement and/or the Loan Agreement, or
as may be explicitly requested by the Bank, in sharing any information, report or document related to the activities
described in Schedule 1 to the Loan Agreement, ensure that such information, report or document does not
include Personal Data.

Conditions

Type
Financing source
Description
Effectiveness
IBRD/IDA
Section 4.01, Loan Agreement (LA): The Implementing
Entity has prepared, approved, and adopted a
Procurement Manual which consolidates all
procurement orders and/or procedures applicable for
the Program.

Type
Financing source
Description
Disbursement
IBRD/IDA
Section IV.B.1(a), Schedule 2 to the LA: No withdrawal
shall be made under Categories (1) to (9) on the basis
of Disbursement Linked Results (DLRs) achieved prior
to the Signature Date, except that withdrawals up to
an aggregate amount not to exceed $50,000,000 may
be made on the basis of DLRs achieved prior to this
date but on or after June 30, 2022.
Section IV.B.1(b), Schedule 2 to the LA: No
withdrawal shall be made under Categories (1) to (9)
for any DLR, until and unless the Borrower has
furnished evidence satisfactory to the Bank that said
DLR has been achieved.

Chhattisgarh: Accelerated Learning for a Knowledge-Economy (P179249)

I. STRATEGIC CONTEXT

A. Country Context

1.
India’s growth is expected to moderate in FY23/24 to 6.3 percent, from an estimated 6.9 percent in FY22/23,
due to easing consumption growth and global growth spillovers. Despite the global growth slowdown, real GDP is
expected to have expanded by 6.9 percent in FY22/23. This robust growth was underpinned by buoyant private
consumption in the first half of FY22/23 and strong expansion in investment activity supported by a sustained increase
in public capital spending. In contrast, government consumption growth moderated due to the central government’s
commitment to reduce current spending. Robust domestic demand and elevated food prices kept headline inflation
above the Reserve Bank of India’s tolerance range (2–6 percent) in FY22/23. Growth momentum eased in the second half
of FY22/23 as high inflation, higher borrowing costs and global spillovers weighed on domestic demand and dampened
exports growth. Real GDP growth is expected to moderate further to 6.3 percent in FY23/24. Consumption is likely to be
constrained by rising borrowing costs, slower growth in incomes and continued fiscal consolidation. The government’s
sustained investment push, healthy corporate profits, and a reduction in bank NPLs will likely buoy investment despite
reduced risk appetite and elevated input costs. Slowing imports growth and ongoing strength in services exports are
expected to contribute to a narrowing of the current account deficit to 2.1 percent of GDP in FY23/24. Despite the
increased public investment, the government is likely to continue pursuing fiscal consolidation. The general government
deficit will decline to 8.7 percent in FY23/24 (compared to 9.4 percent in FY22/23), due to lower current spending and
modest revenue growth, reflecting the withdrawal of pandemic-related support programs. The current level of the fiscal
deficit stabilizes the debt-to-GDP ratio at around 83 percent.

2.
India has made remarkable progress in reducing extreme poverty over the past two decades. The share of the
population living below US$2.15 per person per day (2017 PPP) is estimated to have halved between 2011 and 2019.
However, the pace of poverty reduction has slowed in recent years, with key welfare indicators being slow to improve.
These recent estimates suggest that the pandemic-induced spike in extreme poverty (US$2.15)—of up to 4 percentage
points—has moderated in 2021-22. Facilitated by widespread access to vaccines, extreme poverty rates are estimated to
have declined to 13.8 percent in 2021-22, although not as low as pre-pandemic levels. More than 40 percent of India’s
population lived below the lower-middle income poverty line (US$3.65 per capita per day, 2017 PPP) even before the
pandemic. Inequality in consumption has remained stable, with a Gini index of around 35 over the past two decades.
Child malnutrition has remained high, with 35.5 percent of children under the age of 5 years being stunted and 67 percent
of children aged 6-59 months being anemic during 2019-21. Headline employment indicators have improved since 2020
but concerns about job quality and real wage growth remain.

B. Sectoral (or Multi-Sectoral) and Institutional Context

3.
Chhattisgarh is one of the faster-growing states in India. However, high poverty rates and vulnerabilities are a
concern, and are exarcerbated by climate change. The state has a population of over 30 million of which more than 40
percent live below the poverty line. The share of Scheduled Caste (SC) and Scheduled Tribes (ST) in the state population
is 12.8 percent and 30.6 percent, respectively. The climate in the state varies between 20 to 46 degrees, with variances
across districts. The state is vulnerable to droughts and floods due to erratic monsoons and heat waves that can force
extensions of the annual school summer break and reduce the number of days for instruction.

4.
The federal setup in India treats education as a subject on which both the central and state governments can
formulate policies. The central government provides broad guidelines and facilitates their implementation through a

Chhattisgarh: Accelerated Learning for a Knowledge-Economy (P179249)

centrally sponsored scheme called Samagra Shiksha (SS), which
prioritizes expenditures that can help to enhance the quality of
school education. SS allows for bottom-up decentralized planning
where states have the space to prioritize contextually relevant
expenditures aligned with the recommendations of the New
Education Policy (NEP) 2020 of the GoI. States are responsible for
covering the cost of teacher salaries and regular school operating
costs from their budget. The Department of School Education
(DoSE), Government of Chhattisgarh (GoCG) with support from the
Directorate of Public Instruction is responsible for the overall
management of school education. The State Implementation Society (SIS) for SS (SIS-SS) works under the aegis of the
DoSE, GoCG to manage interventions. The State Council of Education Research and Training (SCERT) is the nodal
educational institution that works with a network of District Institutes of Education and Training (DIETs) to manage
teacher professional development, learning assessments, and remedial education. The State Institute of Education
Management and Training (SIEMAT) is the nodal educational institution that provides in-service training support to school
principals. The Public Works Department (PWD) and the Rural Engineering Service (RES), GoCG, support with any civil
works. The SIS-SS, the SCERT, and SIEMAT have experience in implementing Bank-supported projects.

5.
Chhattisgarh has 56,303 schools of which 48,547 (86.2 percent) are managed by the GoCG, 431 (0.76 percent)
are private schools receiving grant in aid from the GoCG, and the remaining 13.04 percent are private schools. The
state has an enrolment of 6.03 million students, of which 4 million study in schools managed by the GoCG. More than 70
percent of them are SCs, STs, or students from Other Backward Classes (OBCs). The Gross Enrolment Ratio (GER) steadily
declines from 95 percent in the elementary level of education to 86.2 in the secondary level, and to 57.6 percent in the
senior secondary level.

6.
Dropout rates amongst boys, particularly in secondary and senior secondary grades, is a priority gender gap
for Chattisgarh. The GER at the elementary level is 94.9 percent for boys, and 95.1 percent for girl students. However, a
sharp decline in GER for adolescent boys is visible in the secondary (83.2 percent) and senior secondary grades (52.3
percent) as compared with girl students (89.4 and 63.1 percent respectively)1. Extensive stakeholder consultations
undertaken to inform preparation of the operation identified three priority gaps2: First, given the limited access to quality
science and commerce education, adolescent boys in secondary and senior secondary grades find it economically
beneficial to drop out and take up informal jobs available in the labor market. Second, families support this decision and
prefer to have adolescent boys working on farms during the harvest season and being employed in informal jobs, rather
than being in regular schooling. Third, in some areas, students face topographic challenges in accessing senior secondary
schools, in which case boys are left at a disadvantage. The SS scheme supports the setting up and running of residential
schools providing free of cost secondary and senior secondary education to girls. Such schools have a capacity of more
than 14,000 seats. However, such options are not available for adolescent boys. These priority gaps overlap with existing
social norms around the need for boys to work to support the household income, causing high dropout rates at secondary
and senior secondary levels. To address this, the proposed operation will prioritize targeted interventions to improve
access to remedial education and quality science and commerce education at the senior secondary level for boys.

7.
Over the last two years, GoCG has made some initial investments toward improving the availability of science
and commerce education at the senior secondary level by hiring subject specialist teachers and improving school

1 UDISE Plus 2020-21
2 Technical Assessment, 2022, World Bank

Chhattisgarh: Accelerated Learning for a Knowledge-Economy (P179249)

infrastructure to support such education. The 247 schools covered thus far offer over 40,000 senior secondary school
seats in the science and commerce streams. It is encouraging to note that they do not have any vacant seats, and that
about 50.6 percent of students enrolled in the science and commerce streams at the senior secondary level in these
schools are boys. This is in line with the state’s sex ratio of 991 girls to 1,000 boys.

8.
The prolonged school closure during the COVID-19 pandemic has adversely impacted student learning levels.
A comparison of the results reported by the National Achievement Survey (NAS) 2017 and 2021, shows that there has
been a substantial increase in the percentage of students below grade level proficiency.

Table 1: Grade-wise data of the percentage of students below grade level proficiency in Chhattisgarh

Language
Mathematics
NAS 2017 (%)
NAS 2021 (%)
NAS 2017 (%)
NAS 2021 (%)
Grade 3
58.0
75.0
54.0
74.0
Grade 5
59.0
70.0
67.0
88.0
Grade 8
65.0
71.0
71.0
87.0

9.
The state has been witnessing a significant fall in school enrolment at the senior secondary level due to the
lack of seats in the science and commerce stream. Per the latest state records, more than 350,000 students entering
primary schools managed by the GoCG are likely to reach the final year of secondary schooling with about 2 percent
dropouts. However, only 225,000 students can transition to senior secondary schooling. Most senior secondary schools
only provide an arts-oriented education due to the dearth of science and mathematics teachers and appropriate facilities
such as laboratories and workshops. Less than 40 percent of senior secondary students in schools managed by GoCG are
enrolled in the science and commerce streams, while the corresponding statistic for private schools is 85 percent. To
address this issue, since 2020, the GoCG has developed 247 composite schools offering science and commerce education.
These schools have attracted about three times more applications than the number of seats. Although crucial for ensuring
continuous access to school education in sparsely populated areas with low enrolment3, fragmented school functioning
have led to multi-grade teaching4 and higher per-pupil expenditure. Where possible without impacting access to
schooling for students, prioritizing the development of relatively large schools operating with a critical mass of teachers
and students can promote economies of scale, improve expenditure efficiency, and decrease per-pupil expenditure. In
several cases, the ability to develop and operate such schools is limited by the availability of sufficient infrastructure.

10.
GoCG’s focus on improving access to science and commerce education at the senior secondary level directly
responds to underlying shifts in the economy. Over the past five years, while the state Gross Domestic Product has
grown with a Compounded Annual Growth Rate (CAGR) of 9 percent, the manufacturing and services sectors have grown
at a CAGR of 14 percent and 9 percent respectively. This shift corresponds with the GoCG’s priorities. The state has placed
a special emphasis on supporting the growth of these sectors as part of its Sustainable Development Goals 2030 vision.

11.
The network of schools managed by the GoCG has 176,250 teachers, but the majority of teachers lack access
to adequate in-service training and professional development support. Approximately 82,000 (46.5 percent) teachers
are teaching at the primary level (Grades 1 to 5), 47,500 (27 percent) at the upper primary level (Grades 6 to 8), and
46,750 (26.5 percent) at the secondary (Grades 9 and 10) and senior secondary (Grades 11 and 12) levels. Limited inservice training support is resulting in poor quality of teaching-learning interactions. Further, a lack of subject teachers
in schools managed by the GoCG has resulted in Language teachers teaching Mathematics, English, and Sciences. Like all

3 The average enrolment in schools offering primary and/or upper primary education is about 65 students: roughly 8 to 10 students per grade/class.
4 The state’s PTR for schools offering primary and/or upper primary education is 20. When compared with the average enrolment per grade/class, this translates into
every teacher teaching and managing two grades/classes, simultaneously, on average.

Chhattisgarh: Accelerated Learning for a Knowledge-Economy (P179249)

other states in India, GoCG is gradually hiring more teachers to tackle this challenge. However, such efforts get limited
by the available fiscal space to hire new teachers despite the increasing availability of subject teachers in the market. In
the interim, providing teachers with lesson plans or support material has been identified as a possible solution by the
state. In addition, the state has begun creating a system that allows teachers to choose from a menu of training options
(on subject areas and pedagogy), enabling them to benefit from specific support. However, the system needs additional
technical support and manpower to deliver a wide range of modules. Similar challenges exist in in-service professional
development support for school principals and head teachers, which impact their ability to provide high-quality
pedagogical support to teachers and efficiently manage the overall network of schools in the state.

12.
Teachers’ inability to support students in acquiring foundational literacy and numeracy skills has led to belowgrade-level student learning outcomes at higher levels of schooling. To address this, the state has introduced a threemonth school readiness initiative for all children entering Grade 1 and has started an initiative that requires primary
school teachers to devote a few hours to providing Early Childhood Education (ECE) to children enrolled in the nearby
Anganwadi5 centers. It is also planning for a universal rollout of the Teaching at the Right Level (TaRL) approach in the
primary grades. Children speak more than 24 languages in the state, and teachers have limited in-service training and
support materials to effectively manage multilingual classrooms. The state has identified a clear need to appropriately
structure these multiple initiatives into a single multi-year, short-term, in-service training initiative.

13.
The lack of a standardized system to assess student learning through a diagnostic lens restricts the nodal
educational institutions’ ability to identify issue(s) and take necessary corrective actions. The state has minimal learning
assessment data as it does not have in place a system of periodic state Level Achievement Surveys (SLAS). The state does
have a SCERT Assessment Cell (SAC) that conducts periodic, centrally managed formative and summative assessments.
However, it does not collect student or item-level data. Further, the quality of test items needs to be improved. The lack
of data impacts its ability to plan in-service teacher training and support teachers with remedial education initiative for
students. Periodic SLAS, and school-based assessments can provide the required information. However, the SAC has
limited capacity and experience in these areas.

C. Relationship to the CPS/CPF and Rationale for Use of Instrument

14.
The proposed Chhattisgarh: Accelerated Learning for a Knowledge-Economy (CHALK) operation (“the
operation”) is consistent with the World Bank Group (WBG) Country Partnership Framework (CPF) FY18-22 discussed
by the WBG Board of Executive Directors on September 20, 2018 (Report No. 126667-IN). The operation aims to build
human capital by accelerating recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic-induced learning losses. The operation is relevant
to two focus areas of the CPF: (a) enhancing investment in the early years of children’s development; and (b) improving
the quality of education in schools and colleges. Where necessary, the operation aims to leverage technical experts to
provide capacity building support to nodal education institutions. The best practices from the operation could facilitate
cross-learning between low-income states that face similar challenges, promoting the ‘Lighthouse India’ concept6.

15.
CHALK is consistent with the WBG Global Crisis Response Framework (GCRF), specifically the GCRF Pillars 2, 3,
and 4. CHALK is directly relevant to GCRF Pillar 2 on ‘Protecting People and Preserving Jobs’, as it seeks to address learning
losses resulting from disruptions in schooling due to COVID-19 through improved in-service professional development
support for teachers with an emphasis on TaRL in the primary grades (Results Area (RA) 1). It is consistent with GCRF
Pillars 3 on ‘Strengthening Resilience’ as it seeks to as it seeks to build long-term resilience, especially to respond to

5 Early Childhood Care and Development centers managed by the Department of Women and Child Development, GoCG
6 https://www.worldbank.org/en/cpf/india/how-we-work/supporting-lighthouse-india

Chhattisgarh: Accelerated Learning for a Knowledge-Economy (P179249)

prolonged school closures due to climate change and promotes a just transition through appropriate remedial support
systems (RA-2). It is also consistent with GCRF Pillar 4 on ‘Strengthening Policies, Institutions and Investments for
Rebuilding Better’ as it seeks to strengthen climate adaptation in school infrastructure (RA-3). There will be a push for
developing school infrastructure with a greener footprint and ensuring an increase in access to quality schooling in coal
mining blocks where future generation(s) need to be supported with a just transition to other sectors of employment as
India gradually reduces its dependence on coal as a source of energy. GCRF pillar mappings for the Investment Project
Financing (IPF) component and the DLIs are presented in paragraphs 41 and 44, respectively.

16.
CHALK seeks to support the state in accelearating  its recovery from the learning loses caused by COVID-19 and
seeks to support a state with high poverty rates. Having recorded some of the lowest student learning levels in the NAS
2021, Chhattisgarh has been one of the first states to adopt critical measures for addressing learning losses. CHALK will
support these measures and positively impact marginalized communities (SCs, STs, and OBCs), which account for about
95 percent of enrolment in schools managed by the GoCG. CHALK will support the development of additional communitymanaged model schools that cater to students from these marginalized communities and/or poor families.

17.
The blended Program for Results (PforR’ “the Program”) with and Investment Project Financing (IPF; “the
project”) component will provide a greater results orientation. Funding will be linked to key outcomes and measures
for strengthening systems for school network management. It will provide the state with the flexibility to use its systems
to design and deploy contextually appropriate approaches while building on the SIS-SS’s experience of implementing
past, Bank-supported projects. The PforR instrument will provide incentives for the GoCG to shift to a model of schooling
that: (a) improves operational efficiency by shifting focus from expanding the network of schools, to introducing reforms
in the areas of planning, management, and monitoring of schools; (b) decentralizes teacher hiring and management; and
(c) focuses resources on expanding capacity in subjects where there is demand from students. The PforR Program will be
supported by an IPF Component to engage technical experts for capacity-building support to nodal institutions.

II. PROGRAM DESCRIPTION

A. Government program

18.
The program of the GoCG comprises the SS initiative funding for quality interventions and the state budget that
is predominantly earmarked for teacher salaries and student entitlements. SS funds interventions in areas such as
foundational learning, teacher and teacher educators’ professional development, remedial education, learning
assessments, technology-enabled interventions (including strengthening of digital infrastructure in teacher education
institutions, and schools), school-based vocational education, and special initiatives for out-of-school children (especially
residential schools for girls; SS does not currently support any investments in residential schools for boys). About 30 to 40
percent of the SS budget is earmarked for quality interventions. The state budget is mostly used to cover teacher salaries,
school development and maintenance, scholarships, and student entitlements (including textbooks, uniforms, and midday
meals). However, about 84.8 percent of the consolidated budget (SS and state budget) is used to pay salaries, and about
10 percent is for student entitlements. This limits the funds available for improving the quality of education and for
investments in strengthening the network of schools managed by GoCG to enhance access to senior secondary education.

B. Theory of Change

19.
The theory of change espoused by the proposed operation is two-pronged. It seeks to: (a) improve learning levels
by strengthening key nodal institutions that impart in-service teacher professional development along with managing

Chhattisgarh: Accelerated Learning for a Knowledge-Economy (P179249)

student learning achievement assessments to support appropriate remedial education; and (b) increase the number of
schools offering senior secondary education in science and commerce in line with demand from the students/community.

Figure 1: Theory of change diagram

C. PforR Program Scope

20.
Within the overarching program of the GoCG, CHALK seeks to: (a) strengthen the capacity of nodal educational
institutions to improve in-service professional development support for teachers, (b) improve learning assessment
systems and corresponding remedial education support, (c) support development and improved management of model
composite schools offering science and commerce education at the senior secondary level, and (d) strengthen school
management via capacity building support for principals, and School Management Committees (SMCs).

21.
Results Area 1 (RA-1) – Improved in-service professional development support for teachers: CHALK will support

Chhattisgarh: Accelerated Learning for a Knowledge-Economy (P179249)

the SCERT to better respond to teachers’ in-service training needs and will provide complementary resource materials
(e.g., exemplar video lessons and digital content). For primary education teachers, CHALK will support the development
and rollout of a short-term, multiyear, in-service training course to: (a) facilitate a shift towards TaRL with an emphasis
on foundational level competencies; and (b) provide modules on the pedagogical skills needed to effectively manage
multigrade-multilingual classrooms. For upper primary and secondary education teachers, CHALK will support: (a) a shift
toward need-based training where teachers have the option to create customized annual training plans from a list of
subject-specific and pedagogical modules developed from SLAS data; and (b) the development and rollout of grade and
subject-specific lesson plans at the upper primary, secondary, and senior secondary levels.

22.
Through CHALK, the SCERT will consolidate its in-service training offerings, improving the training quality to best
utilize the 10 or more days of training that teachers are required to complete in a year. For primary grade teachers, CHALK
will combine the existing multiple training into a single, short-term (60-day), multi-year in-service training course. This
course will cover: (a) ECE pedagogy, which teachers will apply at the Anganwadis near primary schools managed by the
GoCG; (b) a school readiness initiative for students entering Grade 1; and (c) TaRL. The overalapping concepts and
pedagogical aspects of these trainings will be structured into a single overarching course that focuses on TaRL. The course
will utilize a hybrid format, leveraging in-person and online training, classroom-based coaching, and peer-to-peer
learning. This course will be managed by a network of academic resource persons who will be trained by the SCERT.

23.
For upper primary and secondary grade teachers, CHALK will support the state in establishing a data-informed
and need-based in-service teacher training system. The SCERT will gradually cater to teachers’ needs, as recorded in an
annual training plan that each teacher will input into an online planning tool, by: (a) developing the required modules,
and (b) training academic resource persons on these modules. Meanwhile, teachers will be required to choose from a
long list of trainings (in-person and online). This will include need-based training on topics related to climate education
and pedagogical practices. To maximize efficiency, the state will implement a two-tier cascade model in which resource
persons will directly lead the training. SLAS and sample-based periodic classroom observations (using the TEACH7 tool or
an adaptation) will provide the information needed to improve the relevance and quality of the training modules.

24.
CHALK will support the development and rollout of lesson plans for all grades and subjects at the upper primary,
secondary, and senior secondary levels. The lesson plans will be informed by learning assessment data, and will cover
climate change education. They will be designed to reinforce key concepts that should be prioritized before proceeding
to the grade-level curriculum. Notably, CHALK will strive for a high-quality benchmark for these lesson plans, leveraging
the World Bank’s Teachers’ Guide Quality Assessment Tool (or an adaptation of it) to assess their structure and quality.

25.
Climate Adaptation and Mitigation Measures Under RA-1: Through its focus on providing teachers with access
to better quality in-service professional development support and grade and subject-wise lesson plans, CHALK will
support the enhancement of teachers’ capacity to integrate climate/environment education in classroom instruction.

26.
Results Area 2 (RA-2) – Improved, centrally developed, and digitally enabled student diagnostic and
assessment systems for primary, upper primary, and secondary levels of education. CHALK will support the SAC in: (a)
designing school-based formative and summative assessments with digitally enabled recording and analysis of student
responses (disaggregated by gender), and use the same to generate class and student-specific remedial education plans
with a focus on support for academically weak students, especially adolescent boys; and (b) strengthening system-level
assessments as tools for informing education policy and practice across the state.

7 https://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/education/brief/teach-helping-countries-track-and-improve-teaching-quality

Chhattisgarh: Accelerated Learning for a Knowledge-Economy (P179249)

27.
CHALK will support the state in defining clear, competency-based, learning standards that will underpin all
assessment activities, and in developing a dashboard that will collect and report on data from all kinds of assessments.
CHALK will support the development of centrally designed, school-based diagnostic assessments with complementary
remedial education resources for use by teachers. This will include assessment of students understanding of climate
change related topics and provision of remedial education support to students where necessary. It will invest in the
gradual digital enablement of these assessments and facilitate a faster turnaround in marking/scoring students’
responses to these assessments, collation, analysis, and communication of the results. This digital system will be designed
to allow teachers to quickly and easily access student, subject, class, and school-level scores; remedial plans; and teaching
resources. The digital enablement of the process will also help in ensuring that the students’ academic performance
records are maintained in an electronic format and are protected from any loss due to any climate included incidents.
The RA-2 will strengthen the delivery of customized remedial support for adolescent boys from Grades 6 to 10. The
support provided will help in course correcting learning deficiencies and in helping to prevent dropouts due to academic
factors. CHALK will also support the state in developing, implementing, and analyzing periodic SLAS with grater focus on
improving the quality of test items, test administration practices, and depth of analysis.

28.
Climate Adaptation and Mitigation Measures Under RA-2: CHALK will focus on setting up systems for digitally
enabled formative and summative assessments that can enable teachers to: (a) identify gaps in students learning
(including on climate and environment-related curriculum/competencies) including those originating from unplanned
school closures due to climate-induced incidents and extreme weather incidents; (b) provide remedial education support
to students; and (c) in tandem maintain electronic records from a digitally enabled data collation mechanism that
removes the need for large volumes of paper usually required for assessments/examinations.

29.
Results Area 3 (RA-3) – Decentralized school development and management for efficient and effective
operation: CHALK will facilitate a shift to context-specific infrastructure development and refurbishment, and
management of schools via incentives for operating at economies of scale, greater operational efficiency, and better
teacher effectiveness. At least 600 schools will be transformed into model schools8 that: (a) are large composite (Grades
K to 12; or Grades 6 to 12) setups managed by a semi-autonomous school management society9; (b) are set up to operate
with a critical mass of teachers, recruited flexibly to meet the school’s needs, and a school principal appointed via a meritbased selection process; (c) provide science and commerce education at the senior secondary level with associated
facilities, including, science and ICT laboratories and smart classrooms; (d) offer residential facilities for students and
teachers in topographically complex areas to facilitate access; and (e) have periodic school monitoring with parents
participation to facilitate greater accountability, proper maintenance of facilities, and better utilization of resources. The
Program will also support minor repair of facilities (classrooms, toilets, and drinking water facilities) in the smaller schools
that operate around the model composite schools.

30.
CHALK will support efforts to improve the operational efficiency of at least 600 schools by enhancing them to
operate as model composite schools that can provide a quality education through better availability of teachers, strong
school leadership and management, and adequate learning facilities. These schools will help in improving access to
science and commerce education at the senior secondary level, especially for students from SC, ST, and OBC communities
and can help reduce the gender gap in senior secondary schooling. These schools will be developed in blocks where most
of the population is from the SC, ST, and OBC community, and/or coal mining blocks where the community primarily

8 Composite schools refer to institutions offering education from Grade 1 to 12. This is contrary to the existing setup where most schools only offer primary education
(Grades 1 to 5), elementary education (Grade 1 to 8), secondary education (Grades 9 to 10), or secondary and senior secondary education (Grades 9 to 12).
9 Given the emphasis of the RTE Act (2009) on decentralizing the management of schools, in the context of the operation, under the directives issued by the GoCG, a
semi-autonomous school management society refers to a governance setup under which a school is registered as a setup that has the flexibility to plan and manage
its operations under the direction of a management board comprising of a district level administrative officer, the school principals, and community representatives.

Chhattisgarh: Accelerated Learning for a Knowledge-Economy (P179249)

relies on the coal sector for employment. All will be co-educational schools in rural areas. The state will set up at least
two additional model composite schools in each of its 146 administrative blocks, and the remainder will be
proportionately distributed across administrative blocks based on the underlying number of students completing their
secondary schooling serving as a proxy for the demand for senior secondary schooling, or concentrated in SC and ST
blocks where students have learning outcomes lower than the state average.

31.
The more than 600 model composite schools (1.25 to 1.5 percent of the total number of schools managed by the
GoCG) are expected to serve between 725,000 to 800,000 students (about 20 percent of students enrolled in schools
managed by the GoCG), and will employ more than 15,000 teachers (about 7.5 percent of teachers teaching in schools
managed by the GoCG). These schools will also employ close to 6,000 support staff (guards, janitors, cooks, and helpers
for preparing school meals, and so on). This will help enhance on-campus hygiene and safety and allow for better
maintenance of infrastructure and facilities. CHALK will support infrastructure development and refurbishment across
300 of the 600 schools with a focus on improving the learning environment, providing facilities essential for supporting
science and commerce education at the senior secondary level, setting up residential facilities for boys10 and teachers in
blocks with low population density and poor physical connectivity, and a set of critical management reforms (given
below). Civil works across schools will have disaster resilient designs, use energy and water efficient fixtures, and promote
natural ventilation and lighting by focusing on these aspects while finalizing architectural plans and drawings. In addition,
the state has identified up to 425 schools that have the necessary infrastructure/facilities and can be strengthened to
operate as model composite schools through the set of management reforms (summarized below). At least 300 of these
will be strengthened with the required quality reforms to meet the model composite schools’ status.

Table 2: Summary of shifts in school operating model resulting from quality reforms envisioned under the Program
Area of School
Management
Prevailing Landscape
Proposed Shift
Level of School
Education Offered
Primary (Grades 1 to 5), Elementary (Grades 1 to 8),
Secondary (9 to 10), or Senior Secondary (Grades 11 to 12)
Composite School (Grades 1 to 12 or Grades 6 to 12)
Average Enrolment
65 at primary and/or upper primary schools to 200 in
secondary and/or senior secondary education
600+ students if supporting Grades 1 to 12; and 400+
students if supporting Grades 6 to 12
School Principal
Seniority based promotion
Seniority and merit-based selection
Teacher Availability
Each teacher managing 2-3 grades; English, Science, and
Mathematics teachers are not available as required
At least one teacher per grade; Subject specialized
teachers; Senior faculty available to mentor teachers
School Management
Directly under the purview of the DoSE
Semi-autonomous society with greater autonomy for
school-level planning, budgeting, and management

32.
CHALK will support minor repairs across small schools that operate around the model composite schools. The
nature of minor repairs will encompass the repair of toilets, drinking water facilities, classrooms, and boundary walls.
Under the hub and spoke type operating model proposed under NEP 2020, these schools offering primary, upper primary,
and/or secondary education are expected to operate as extensions of the model composite schools. Many students from
these schools will move to the model composite school to complete their secondary or senior secondary schooling.

33.
CHALK will also support the development and roll-out of a school performance evaluation tool which will consider
parents’ feedback whilst periodically assessing the functioning of the model composite schools. With each school being
set up as a semi-autonomous society headed by the district-level administration, this will help facilitate expedient
response to administrative and operational issues at the school. Environmental and social aspects will be a focus area

10 Residential schools for girls are already available across the state and supported under the Kasturba Gandhi Balika Vidyalaya initiative under the centrally sponsored
scheme for school education (Samagra Shiksha). These schools identify out-of-school girls, enroll them in residential schools, and provide them with bridge education,
and intensive remedial education to bring them to par with grade-level academic expectations. No such initiative is available for boys.

Chhattisgarh: Accelerated Learning for a Knowledge-Economy (P179249)

under the tool. School safety, School Related Gender Based Violence (SRGBV), the functionality of Grievance Redressal
Mechanisms (GRM), maintenance of facilities, transparency in admissions processes, and availability of teachers, will all
feature prominently in the tool. In this regard, the Program will support the SIEMAT to develop and roll out modules for
corresponding capacity-building support for SMCs. It will also support the state in subsequently developing a lighter
version of the tool that would be relevant for a state-wide rollout to cover all schools managed by the GoCG.

34.
Climate Adaptation and Mitigation Measures Under RA-3: CHALK will support efforts toward climate-proofing
school infrastructure to promote safe school operations, and while doing so promote the use of energy- and waterefficient fixtures, disaster resilience in the design of facilities, and environmentally friendly construction practices.
Further, several of the model schools to be upgraded are expected to be in areas that house coal-fired power plants and
coal mines. Importantly, India’s commitment to gradually reducing its dependence on coal as a source of energy, and the
state’s dependence on the sector as a source of employment will require a gradual transition. CHALK will support the
youth in transitioning to other sectors of employment by providing them with access to science and commerce education
at the senior secondary level. At least 5 percent of the model composite schools will be set up in these areas.

35.
Results Area 4 (RA-4) – School leadership development: CHALK will support the SIEMAT in providing in-service
academic and administrative leadership training to school principals, helping them gain improved mastery in school
leadership competencies, Disaster Risk Management (DRM), and SRGBV.

36.
The success of the operation would depend significantly on the grassroots-level behavior changes that would be
led by decentralized education functionaries. School leaders will be key to ensuring that schools operate with greater
efficiency and effectiveness. In this direction, CHALK will provide them with access to relevant opportunities for training
on key leadership skills. In line with the nodal national institutions’ framework(s), the focus will be on the following skills:
(a) self-awareness; (b) self-management; (c) communication; (d) influence; (e) conflict management; (f) collaboration; (g)
managing curriculum and instruction; (h) promoting learning culture; (i) coaching and providing feedback; (j) data-driven
instructions; (k) managing school resources and systems; and (l) managing financial resources. A system of periodic,
online psychometric self-assessments will be developed to enable the school leaders to ascertain their performance on
these leadership competencies and identify areas of improvement on which the SIEMAT will provide them with the
necessary training. Additionally, the RA-4 will support their training on catalyzing changes in community behaviors
through parental engagement to encourage them to keep their children enrolled in school and aim for completion of
their senior secondary education. It will also support in-service capacity building support in the areas of DRM and SRGBV.

37.
Climate Adaptation and Mitigation Measures Under RA-4: CHALK will focus on capacity building of school
principals on critical aspects of climate change and disaster risk management. To enable them to play a more critical role
in areas of school safety and prevention of SRGBV, they will be provided with training on: (a) DRM to improve schoollevel readiness to face climate-induced disasters and public health emergencies, and (b) prevention of SRGBV11. This
training will gradually be made available to all teachers across the network of schools managed by the GoCG.

38.
The mapping of the Government program and the boundary for the PforR Program are summarized below.

Table 3: Mapping of the GoCG’s program and the PforR Program

Government program
PforR Program
Reasons for non-alignment
Objective
To facilitate post-COVID-19
education recovery by
To improve the quality of
school education and ccess
The PDO provides greater outcome orientation and
facilitates the measurability of results. It prioritizes results

11 Training on the prevention of SRGBV will have its foundation in the existing capacity-building work that the State is undertaking in the area of sensitizing teachers
and school leaders on the Prevention of Sexual Harassment at the Workplace Act (2013) and the Protection of Children from Sexual Offenses Act (2012)

Chhattisgarh: Accelerated Learning for a Knowledge-Economy (P179249)

strengthening teaching-learning
and implementing the vision of
NEP 2020
to science and commerce
senior secondary
education.
aimed at accelerating recovery from the learning losses
caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Duration
July 2023 to December 2028
Not Applicable
Geographic
coverage
All schools managed by the GoCG
or all privte schools receiving
grant in aid from GoCG
All schools managed by the
GoCG
To ensure that Program benefits the underserved
communities, it will only support schools managed by the
GoCG where most students are SC, ST, and OBC, and belong
to low-income households
Results
areas
RA-1: In-service teacher
professional development | RA-2:
Improved student diagnostic &
assessment | RA-3: Universal
access to elementary and
improved access to secondary
education (school construction,
mid-day meal, student
entitlements, and salaries) | RA4: School leadership
development | RA-5: pre-service
teacher training | RA-6:
Vocational education
RA-1: Improved in-service
professional development
support for teachers| RA-2:
Improved, centrally
developed, and digitally
enabled student diagnostic
and assessment systems |
RA-3: Decentralized School
Development and
Management for Efficient
and Effective operation |
RA-4: School Leadership
development
RA-1 expands the purview of support to teachers to cover
in-service training and provision of resource materials| RA3 would restrict focus on a limited number of schools,
incentivizing system-level reforms to support the
development and management of model composite
schools | RA-5 of the Government program is excluded
given that post-2024, pre-service training will be under the
purview of the Department of Higher Education | RA-6 of
the Government program is excluded as the state has
initiated a model wherein students can simultaneously
pursue their school leaving certificate and a degree from an
Industrial Training Institution. Support to the latter is
covered under an existing Bank project on Skill
Strengthening for Industrial Value Enhancement (P156867).
Financing
US$9.765 billion
US$535.8 million

39.
Program expenditure framework and financing: CHALK will account for about 5.5 percent of the program of the
GoCG, and 43 percent of it will be financed via counterpart financing. Over the last three years, the program of the GoCG
has grown at a Compounded Annual Growth Rate of about 4.6 percent. This should help sustain the Program’s results.
CHALK will enable the state to more than double its expenditure on quality-related aspects while using the program of
the GoCG to cover teacher salaries. The development of the model composite schools will foster greater expenditure
efficiency through a reduction in the per pupil expenditure from US$445 to US$295 per annum resulting from economies
of scale. This will help free up the state’s annual incremental budget to sustain Program results.

Table 4: Details of Program financing, financing for IPF-TA component, and other costs
Source
Amount (US$Million)
Percentage
Overall program of the GoCG
9,764.5

Of which, the state budget
9,441.8
Of which, Samagra Shiksha
322.7
CHALK Program (PforR)
535.8

Counterpart funding (state budget and Samagra Shiksha)
258.3
48.2
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD) (a)
277.5
51.8
IPF Component supporting CHALK Program – IBRD (b)
21.75

Other Costs (Front End Fee) – IBRD (c)
0.75

Total IBRD (a+b+c)
300.0

40.
An expenditure framework highlighting the direct and implicit leverage for the CHALK Program, and results
area-wise mapping of expected expenditures are summarized below12.
Table 5: Program expenditure framework
#
Broad Classification and
Agency Responsible
Major Budget Heads
Five-Year Expenditure Projection (US$Million)
Y1
Y2
Y3
Y4
Y5
Total
Education Quality
Support for Foundational Literacy and Numeracy
3.0
3.1
3.2
3.3
3.5
16.1

12 The budget heads are based on the major heads of expenditure under the SS initiative. The list is well-defined and has remained consistent over years. This allows
the state budget to be clearly collated and presented with the SS budget. Apart from contributing toward 40 percent of the SS budget, the state budget only funds
teacher salaries, school maintenance and operational costs, education boards/councils, and scholarships.

Chhattisgarh: Accelerated Learning for a Knowledge-Economy (P179249)

Enhancements (Responsible:
SIS-SS with support from
SCERT)
Funds for Quality (Remedial Education)
7.0
7.2
7.4
7.6
7.9
37.1
Teacher Educators Professional Development
1.3
1.4
1.4
1.4
1.4
6.9
In-service Teacher Training and Head Teacher Training
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
1.2
6.1
TEI Infrastructure and Maintenance
13.0
13.6
14.2
14.8
15.5
71.1
Support for Inclusive Education
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.7
0.7
3.2
Examinations And
Assessments (Responsible:
SIS-SS with support from SAC)
Education Boards/Councils
1.2
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.4
6.5
Assessment at the National and state Level
3.0
3.1
3.2
3.3
3.5
16.1
Grants And Aid to PrivateAided Schools
Grants and Aid to Private-Aided Schools
40.1
42.0
43.9
45.9
48.0
219.8
School Infrastructure
Upgradation and Repair
(Responsible: SIS-SS through
RES (20%) and PWD (80%))
School Infrastructure and Strengthening of Existing
Schools
110.6
71.4
63.5
45.6
43.5
334.7
School Leadership and
Management Strengthening
(Responsible: SIS-SS with
support from SIEMAT)
Academic support through BRCs and CRCs
2.5
2.6
2.7
2.8
2.9
13.3
Community Mobilization
0.7
0.7
0.7
0.8
0.8
3.6
ICT And Digital Initiatives (including EMIS)
2.5
2.6
2.7
2.9
3.0
13.7
Project Management, Monitoring, and Evaluation
2.6
2.7
2.8
2.9
3.0
14.0
School Maintenance and
Operation Cost
School Maintenance and Operation Cost
18.4
19.2
20.1
21.0
22.0
100.7
Student Entitlements
Mid-day Meal
74.8
78.2
81.7
85.4
89.3
409.4
Scholarships, Transport Allowance, and Entitlements
79.8
83.4
87.2
91.2
95.3
437.0
Teacher And Teacher
Educator Salary
Teacher, Teacher Educator, and BRC and CRC Salaries
1,463.2
1,529.8
1,599.4
1,672.2
1,748.3
8,012.9
Vocational Education
Vocational Education
1.5
1.6
1.6
1.7
1.8
8.2
Others
Others
6.2
6.5
6.8
7.1
7.4
34.1
Total Government Program
1,833.2
1,872.1
1,945.8
2,013.1
2,100.3
9,764.5
 Total CHALK Program
147.9
110.2
103.7
87.2
86.8
535.8
 IBRD Share
100.8
60.9
52.1
33.3
30.4
277.513
Source: Average state Education Budget for 2019-20 and 2021-22; and SS expenditure for 2019-20 and 2021-22 used for projections.
The year 2020-21 has been excluded due to expenditures getting impacted by school closures due to COVID-19.

41.
The IPF Techical Assisstance (IPF-TA) component will extend capacity-building support to nodal education
institutions through the engagement of technical experts to: (a) provide in-service training to teachers; (b) develop
resource materials for remedial education; and (c) manage learning assessments. It will also support the hiring of a vendor
to develop an Education Management Information System (EMIS), and the engagement of a Project Management
Consultant (PMC) and an Independent Verification Agency (IVA) for the validation of results under the Program. The IPF
component primarily supports Pillar 2 of the GCRF on ‘Protecting People and Preserving Jobs’ as it seeks to address
learning losses from disruptions in schooling due to COVID-19 through by facilitating the provision of the techcnial
support that nodal education institutions need for delivering an improved quality of in-service training for teachers with
an emphasis on TaRL in the primary grades.

D. Program Development Objective(s) (PDO) and PDO Level Results Indicators

42.
PDO: To improve the quality of school education and access to science and commerce senior secondary
education.

43.
PDO Indicators: For measuring the quality of school education – (a) Increase in Grade 4 students at and above
grade level proficiency in Language and Math (percentage) 14, (b) Increase in school completion rateat the secondary level
(percentage), of which males (percentage) 15. For measuring access to senior secondary education – (c) Increase in science

13 The IBRD share is US$277.5 million for the PforR Program, US$21.75 million for the IPF component, and US$750,000 of front-end fee capitalized in the loan
14 An assessment at the Grade 5 level will be preferred as it measures learning levels towards the end of primary schooling. However, Grade 5 is covered under the
NAS of MoE, GoI. The frequency of the NAS does not align with the Program mid-line and end-line. Therefore, CHALK proposes to use the state’s Grade 4 assessment.
15 The indicator records the percentage of students enrolled in grade 9 who subsequently pass the secondary school leaving examination held at the end of grade 10.

Chhattisgarh: Accelerated Learning for a Knowledge-Economy (P179249)

and commerce senior secondary education enrolment in government schools (number), of which male (number).

E. Disbursement Linked Indicators and Verification Protocols

44.
Under the PforR instrument, funds will be disbursed on the achievement of results, measured by Disbursement
Linked Indicators (DLIs). Apart from the three PDO indicators, results from seven of the eight intermediate outcome
indicators have been included as DLIs. The selection of these indicators is because they either capture key outcomes, the
implementation of critical actions, or the realization of outputs that are key to realizing the PDO; hence the perceived
need to introduce a strong financial incentive to deliver the same.16

Table 6: Summary of DLI wise disbursement projections, disaggregated by year of implementation
#
Disbursement Linked Indicator

Allocation (US$Million)
GCRF
Pillar
Prior
Results Year 1
Year 2
Year 3
Year 4
Year 5
Total
Increase in percentage of Grade 4 students at and above grade level
proficiency in Language and Math
Pillar 2
0.00
10.00
0.00
8.00
0.00
8.00
26.00
Increase in school completion rate at the secondary level
Pillar 2
0.00
0.00
0.00
5.00
0.00
5.00
10.00
Increase in science and commerce senior secondary education enrolment in
government schools
Pillar 4
0.00
12.00
0.00
6.00
0.00
6.00
24.00
Improved teacher capacity to support the utilization of TaRL and climate
change education in the primary grades
Pillar 2
0.00
4.50
2.625
2.625
2.625
2.625
15.00
Improved provision of need-based in-service training (including climate change
education) for Grade 6-10 teachers
Pillar 2
0.00
1.00
6.00
4.50
0.00
6.00
17.50
Increase in the use of diagnostic assessment tools for the provision of remedial
support
Pillar 3
0.00
3.00
4.00
5.00
3.00
0.00
15.00
Increase in the number of model composite schools with disaster resilient and
energy efficient facilities and offering science and commerce senior secondary
education
Pillar 4
50.00
25.00
25.00
25.00
25.00
0.00
150.00
Improved leadership competencies of school principals and better capacity in
the area of DRM and SRGBV
Pillar 3
0.00
1.00
6.80
3.00
0.00
4.2
15.00
Improved, decentralized financial and procurement management capacity
Pillar 4
0.00
2.00
2.00
0.50
0.00
0.50
5.00
Total

108.500
46.425
59.625
30.625
32.325
277.5

45.
Unless specified otherwise, the DLIs will be annually reviewed and verified by an IVA to be contracted by the SISSS, GoCG under the IPF-TA Component. The DLIs will be verified through pre-identified data sources, documents, and
reports. The means of verification will vary from field-based sample surveys (GIS and time stamped), telephonic and/or
online surveys, field-based observation, desk-based triangulation of data, and validation of timely release of official
government orders and notifications of the GoCG. The state EMIS developed by year 3 of operation implementation, will
emerge as the source that collates all the required data for independent verification. IVA reports will serve as the basis
for assessing progress toward the achievement of the DLI targets, and for disbursement authorization by the World Bank.

III. PROGRAM IMPLEMENTATION

A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements

46.
The operation will leverage the state’s existing institutional arrangements for Program implementation
(paragraph 4). This arrangement operationalized under past World Bank-funded projects of the GoI of which Chhattisgarh
was a participating state, provides for defined funds flow arrangements, operational guidelines, and demarcated roles
and responsibilities for each agency. The SIS-SS under the guidance and aegis of the DoSE, GoCG (supported in its decision

16 The only intermediate outcome indicator not covered as a DLI corresponds to the development and rollout of a framework/tool for community led social audit of
schools. This has been done to ensure that across all decentralized levels of service delivery, this exercise is perceived as an effort for self-reflection for improvement.

Chhattisgarh: Accelerated Learning for a Knowledge-Economy (P179249)

making by the Directorate of Public Instruction) will be the nodal implementing agency and will be supported by a PMC.
It will be responsible for non-civil works procurement, overall financial management of the Program, results monitoring
and reporting, and overall coordination between the various implementing agencies and institutions. With the support
of its small engineering wing, the SIS-SS will also be responsible for overall coordination and monitoring of the
environment and social aspects associated with the operation. The SCERT will be the implementing agency for activities
in the areas of teacher professional development (RA-1). A SAC housed at the SCERT will be responsible for activities
around student learning assessments and corresponding remedial support (RA-2). SIEMAT will be responsible for the
delivery of activities on school leadership and EMIS development (RA-4). The DIETs and an underlying, decentralized
network of block-level centers and academic resource persons will support the SCERT and the SIEMAT to deliver activities
at the district and sub-district levels as is the case under the existing structures and procedures. The SIS will be
strengthened to house a dedicated unit that will be responsible for managing the network of model composite schools.
The PWD and the RES of the GoCG will act as sub-implementing agencies to SIS and manage the construction and
redevelopment of the large composite schools, and minor repair in the smaller schools located around the large
composite schools under a hub and spoke model (RA-3). The SIS will share with the PWD and RES its requirements. In
turn, these two supporting implementing agencies will prepare architectural drawings and building designs with
corresponding costings. The same will be used to enter into service-level agreements for civil works which once cleared
by the SIS will determine the volume of funds flow for them to plan, execute, manage, and monitor the works. SIS-SS will
be responsible for the entire financial management cycle of planning, budgeting, budget execution,
accounting/payments, and auditing for the CHALK Program. Overall operation implementation will also leverage and
benefit from the inputs and advise of the Directorate of Internal Finance, Finance Department (FD), GoCG.

47.
CHALK will leverage the institutional capacity and decentralized management and monitoring mechanisms of the
PWD for civil works across model composite schools, and RES for minor infrastructure works across small schools. Setup
as large engineering wings responsible for the development and repair of buildings, roads, bridges, etc., the PWD and
RES have dedicated verticals for ‘Buildings’ which have staff with expertise in areas such development of building plans
and architectural drawings, site survey work, site management and monitoring, building safety assessment, etc. They
operate through a decentralized network of engineers at the district and sub-district levels and have the staff strength
required to undertake such works. The Program boundary will be limited to covering the school education-related works
to be undertaken by these two agencies. Where required the operation will enable them to engage need-based technical
support to improve the environmental footprint of the civil works, and to enhance the school’s learning environment.

B. Results Monitoring and Evaluation

48.
The concurrent monitoring of results will be based on GoCG’s data, records, documents, and notifications, and
third-party verification will be prioritized. By year 3, the state’s EMIS will be developed under the IPF-TA component. It
will become the single source of data and information for results tracking. A PMC will be engaged to support the SIS-SS
in monitoring results. Indicator-wise details on the source of data, methodology of data collection, and responsibility for
the same, are available in Annex 1. Most indicators and results that will be utilized to track progress have also been
included as DLIs. This will enable third-party validation. A few of the intermediate outcome indicators have endline
targets set in year 3 or 4 of the operation. This is because it would be necessary for the operation to have one or two full
years of implementation post-endline target achievement for these intermediate outcomes to help the operation in
realizing its PDO-level objectives/results. On the other hand, the PDO-level indicators’ targets have been set for every
alternate year of implementation. This is because these high-level outcome indicators are slow to move. While the
operation will track year-on-year progress, a significant movement toward the endline would take at least two years.

C. Disbursement Arrangements

Chhattisgarh: Accelerated Learning for a Knowledge-Economy (P179249)

49.
CHALK will use DLIs to operationalize the results-based financing implicit in a PforR Program. Financial support
from the World Bank will be disbursed based on the achievement of results under a set of DLIs. For detail on the volume
of funds associated with each DLI, kindly refer to paragraph 44. None of the DLIs will be time-bound. This will allow for
early disbursement of funds in case targets are achieved at an earlier date. Subject to the realization of results within the
period of Program implementation, it will also allow for the disbursement of funds even if a result is delivered with a
delay. This flexibility is important as a few results depend on context-specific attributes such as topography, and
underlying community representation in various districts of the state. While mechanisms are being put in place to address
these challenges, it is difficult to precisely ascertain the pace at which progress will be realized. Expanding the coverage
under model composite schools is an important endeavor under CHALK. This will entail support toward facility
upgradation (civil works) with school-level quality reforms (as described under RA-3). However, over 420 schools have
been identified as potential candidates that do not require any facilities upgradation support. They can be upgraded to
operate as model composite schools by simply adopting the quality reforms planned for such school. GoCG intends to
prioritize these reforms and upgrade at least 300 of these schools to operate as model composite schools before July,
2023. CHALK will recognize this progress and incentivize the same as a ‘Prior Result’.

D. Capacity Building

50.
The operation’s design centers on the critical reforms envisioned under India's NEP (2020), and the GoCG’s
vision for realizing the same. The technical levers or changes are defined and owned by the relevant nodal education
institutions. However, delivering the results envisioned requires: (a) addressing a few technical gaps that might exist in
the current institutional setup; and (b) supplementary (temporary) human resources availability to simultaneously deliver
against multiple requirements. To this end, the operation will leverage the IPF-TA Component for engaging appropriate
technical support agencies. The mandate of these agencies will carry clear responsibilities to ensure the transfer of
capacity. Further, their initial contract will be for a period of three years, to be renewed as per the requirements filtered
through after years of collaborative functioning with the nodal education institutions. Specifically, to facilitate the
required capacity enhancement at the nodal educational institutions, the SCERT will: (a) set up a core group focusing on
foundational learning and TaRL; and (b) bring on board a technical support agency to support the state in defining the
organizational setup and staffing requirements of a SAC. The state will subsequently staff the SAC through a competitive
hiring process. The technical support agency onboarded for supporting the SIEMAT will support the GoCG in appropriately
structuring the SIEMAT into verticals that align with the mandate defined for the institution.

51.
The IPF-TA Component will also support the engagement of a PMC to support the nodal implementing agency
in managing and monitoring the operation and ensuring compliance with the fiduciary, environmental, and social
systems requirements. For this, the PMC will include members with experience in supporting the fiduciary,
environmental, and social aspects. In addition, the PMC will also support the SIS-SS with annual work planning and
budgeting to enhance the utilization of funds available under the operation, and from SS and the state budget.

52.
Where technical tools and analytical reports of the World Bank are deemed helpful, the World Bank will work
with the GoCG to integrate these into the operation. In the first 18 months, this will include support for the roll-out of
the World Bank’s TEACH tool across the model composite schools. In this direction, the Bank team will also draw upon
its experience of supporting the Government of Andhra Pradesh in taking up similar endeavors. The toolkit developed by
the World Bank for assessing the quality of structured lesson plans will also inform the materials developed under the
operation (DLI-5). Subsequently, support will be provided against needs identified during the periodic ISMs.

IV. ASSESSMENT SUMMARY

Chhattisgarh: Accelerated Learning for a Knowledge-Economy (P179249)

A. Technical (including program economic evaluation)

53.
Technical Justification: The NEP 2020 advocates for the transition from curriculum to competency-based
teaching-learning, and an urgent need to accelerate recovery from the learning losses due to COVID-19. The proposed
operation aims to: (a) invest in activities that can enhance the quality of education in schools; (b) influence the transition
from rote memorization and syllabi completion to the acquisition of subject-specific competencies; (c) introduce a shift
to an approach of periodic assessments that identify student specific learning gaps; and (d) identify strategic entry points
for supplementary investments to deepen technical rigor and enhance the impact of GoCG’s investments. Further, it seeks
to simultaneously address the challenge of enhancing access to science and commerce education at the senior secondary
level and leveraging any investments made in this direction to also improve access to quality education for students
enrolled in grades 1 to 10. It seeks to do so by ensuring that schools offering such senior secondary education are large
composite setups that cater to grades 1 to 12, fully leveraging the expertise of senior subject teachers, dynamic school
principals, and adequate learning facilities for students enrolled in the lower grades.

54.
Economic Analysis: A cost-benefit analysis yields an Economic Internal Rate of Return of 17 percent and a Net
Present Value of about US$3 billion using a discount rate of 6.8 percent17. The calculation of the economic benefits is
based on the anticipated achievements against the PDO indicators. Through the course of the operation, about 4 million
students will benefit from improvement in the quality of education imparted in schools managed by the GoCG. Of these,
3.6 million are expected to complete their secondary schooling, and the rest to complete their elementary education.
•
Improved Foundational Learning Outcomes: A one standard deviation improvement in learning levels is expected
to lead to an 18 percentage-point increase in wage upon joining the workforce18. CHALK seeks to increase the
percentage of students at and above grade level proficiency in Grade 4 language and mathematics by 4 percent.
Achievement of proficiency in Grade 4 can be treated as a proxy for completion of primary schooling. An individual
who has completed her/his primary schooling with improved learning levels is expected to earn an additional
income of US$30.6 per annum. These gains would need to be adjusted for labor force participation (49.0 percent)
and unemployment rates (7.5 percent) for the state19.
•
Improved in-service professional development support for teachers: CHALK seeks to improve teaching practices
through access to need-based in-service training, TaRL, and better remedial education support. This is expected
to improve student performance on learning outcomes and translates into an additional 58,000 students
completing grade 10. After adjusting for the workforce participation rate and unemployment rate, this is expected
to result in a higher number of students being able to access the labor market with a higher educational
qualification. These students are expected to earn an additional income of US$10520 per annum.
•
Improved institutional capacity for school-level service delivery:  Increased availability of seats for the science and
commerce streams at the senior secondary level, better teacher availability, and school leadership, along with
improvement in the learning environment will help an additional 30,000 students per annum in completing their
senior secondary schooling. After adjusting for labor force participation rates and unemployment rates, these
students are expected to earn a wage premium of at least US$105 per annum.

55.
The economic costs considered while estimating the EIRR include the overall operation cost of US$558.3 million.

17 Six-month treasury bill rate of the Reserve Bank of India
18 Aslam, M., A. De, G. Kingdon, and R. Kumar (2010) “Economic Returns to Schooling and Skills – An analysis of India and Pakistan, Mimeo, RECOUP Project, Faculty
of Education, University of Cambridge.
19 Annual Report (PLFS), MOSPI 2021-22 age group: 15-29 years
20 Ministry of Statistics and Programme Implementation, National Sample Survey 68th Round; adjusted to 2021-22 using historical inflation rate data, and further
adjusted for using per capita income data for Chhattisgarh and India from the Economic Survey (2021-22) of the GoI

Chhattisgarh: Accelerated Learning for a Knowledge-Economy (P179249)

B. Fiduciary

56.
The Integrated Fiduciary System Assessment (IFSA) of the arrangements under the PforR Program concludes
that the present systems together with proposed mitigation measures will provide reasonable assurance that financing
proceeds will be used for the intended purpose, with due attention to the principles of economy, efficiency, effectiveness,
transparency, and accountability. The IFSA followed the World Bank’s Policy for PforR and the related Directives,
identified key fiduciary risks that may affect the Program’s development outcomes, and recommended system
improvement and capacity-strengthening mitigation measures that will be implemented during the life of the Program.
Based on the IFSA, the fiduciary risk of the Program is assessed as ‘Substantial’. A summary given in Annexure 4 presents
the analysis of the FM and procurement systems towards ensuring the proper utilization of Program funds.

57.
Fiduciary management arrangements under the Program will follow the existing systems for implementing the
SS scheme and is reliant on the use of country financial management systems. The Program will be implemented by SISSS, with PWD and RES acting as sub-implementing agencies for civil work. The SIS-SS will act as the nodal implementing
agency and will be responsible for the FM cycle functions (planning, budgeting, fund flow, internal controls, accounting,
and auditing). The overarching framework will be governed by the Financial Management and Procurement (FMP)
Manual of SS dated August 2018. The Manual has adequate provisions for budgeting, funds flow, accounting, audits, and
procurement arrangements. The Manual is subject to overriding provisions of the GoI General Financial Rules 2017. In
addition, SIS-SS, PWD, and RES have also issued rules, manuals, and guidelines for financial management and
procurement management at various levels. The governing rules were found to be comprehensive however, systemic
gaps were observed in implementation, and areas for strengthening have been identified as part of the IFSA.

58.
The Program activities will be pre-financed by the state budget. The Program Expenditure framework comprises
of cost of ongoing activities and incremental initiatives. The Bank funds will be annually budgeted based on an approved
Annual Work Plan & Budget (AWP&B) and disbursed based on the achievement of annual DLRs. Fund flow will follow a
dual approach: (i) for ongoing initiatives where SIS-SS has an existing AWP&B head of account, funds will be budgeted
along existing budget lines based on AWP&B and will flow through a Single Nodal Account (SNA), with the primary
account under the administrative control of the state head office linked with zero balance accounts of all other Program
implementing agencies; and (ii) for new initiatives, funds will flow under a separate budget line (Externally Aided/CHALK
Program) funding both at DoSE, GoCG, and SIS-SS. DoSE, GoCG will release funds to dedicated CHALK SNA opened under
the administrative control of SIS-SS and have zero balance linked accounts at the sub-implementing agencies level.

59.
The FM systems together with proposed mitigation measures are considered adequate to account for and
report on Program activities and capture the Program expenditure details. Once the annual budget is allotted by GoCG’s
FD, the SIS-SS has the autonomy to undertake procurement and spend the budget allocations on the budgeted Program
activities. The Program’s primary planning and control tool is the AWP&B. No expenditure can be incurred until reflected
in the AWP&B and approved by the Project Approval Board (PAB) at GoI. However, multiple tiers of planning and
implementation and their limited capacities to prepare and manage budgets often result in inadequately planned
budgeting and consequent delays in fund releases and lower budget execution rates.The Program expenditures will be
recorded in the existing accounting system, as per the state’s internal guidelines and procedures.  For independent
assurance on the usage of funds reliance will be placed on the annual audit report of the SIS-SS. The said audit will cover
all expenditures through the CHALK-SNA account including the transaction by PWD and RES and shall also include a
separate schedule for reporting the expenditure against the AWP&B heads forming part of the Program Expenditure
Framework. The report will be submitted to the World Bank within nine months of the close of the Financial Year.

60.
Disbursement Arrangements: The Program funds will be disbursed on satisfactory achievement of the DLI, as

Chhattisgarh: Accelerated Learning for a Knowledge-Economy (P179249)

verified by an IVA following the agreed verification protocol. On certification, the FD communicates the achievement of
the disbursement-linked results to the World Bank in the form agreed upon with the World Bank. Under TA Component,
the disbursement will be reimbursement of actual expenditure against the agreed activities.  The reporting to the World
Bank will be made through agreed formats in the form of Interim Unaudited Financial Reports (IUFRs). Based on the
World Bank’s approval letter, disbursement requests will be submitted to the World Bank office, by the Controller of Aid,
Accounts, and Audit, using the World Bank’s e-Business platform. The funds will be disbursed by the World Bank to GoI
under the IBRD loan terms, which in turn will be released by the GoI to the GoCG as per the agreed financing norms.

61.
Procurement of Goods, Works, and Non-Consultancy contracts under the Program will follow the existing
GoCG procurement systems.  The procurement activities under the Program will be governed by the FMP Manual of SS
dated August 2018. The Manual itself is subject to overriding provisions as contained in the GFR 2017 and Manual for
Procurement of Goods and Works 2017 and Manual for Procurement of Consultancy and Other Services 2017, issued by
the MoF, GoI. The Manual is comprehensive and provides details of implementation arrangements and items to be
procured at various levels of implementation. On the other hand, the consultancy contract procurements under the IPFTA component will be carried out under the World Bank Procurement Regulations for IPF Borrowers, Fourth Edition,
November 2020, the provisions stipulated in a Project Procurement Strategy for Development (PPSD), and a procurement
plan that may be updated from time to time. The TA component will use the Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in
Procurement (STEP) system of the World Bank to plan, record and track procurement transactions.

62.
The Program will include procurement activities like school infrastructure and facilities development, TLM,
teacher training materials, and consultancy services based on a clearly defined Program boundary. The state PWD and
RES will carry out the procurement and contract management of construction and redevelopment of the large composite
schools, and minor repair in the smaller schools clustered around the large composite schools respectively. The SIS-SS
will be responsible for all other goods, non-consulting, and consulting services under the Program. There are no highvalue procurement contracts21 envisaged under CHALK with value at or above operational Procurement Review
Committee thresholds. These departments and agencies are well staffed to shoulder this responsibility. The SIS-SS will
also be responsible for the procurement of consultancy services under the IPF-TA component.

63.
The Project will follow the Government Order (GO) dated May 9, 2022 (amendment to Store Purchase Rules,
2002)
which
stipulates
the
use
of
the
e-Government
Procurement
(e-GP)
platform
of
GoCG
(https://eproc.cgstate.gov.in).  The Program will use the e-GP portal of GoCG for procurement i.e. from the publication
of tender notice (NIT) to the award of contracts. GoCG has mandated the procuring entities of the state to use the eMarketing Network portal of Chhattisgarh state Industrial Development Corporation Ltd. (CSIDC), GoCG
(https://emanec.cg.gov.in) for procurement of commonly available and standard goods and services. This arrangement
is like GoI e-Marketplace (GeM portal https://gem.gov.in/).  The procuring entities are instructed vide GO date May 9,
2022, to use the state’s e-Marketing Network portal for procurement of standard goods and services, and in case the
required goods and services are not available through this channel, the same can be procured through GeM portal.

64.
Governance and Accountability systems.  Corruption and other integrity-related complaints are processed by
the state Vigilance Commission, and the documentation received from the state suggests that the Commission processes
these complaints while adhering to the Whistle-blowers Protection Act (2014) of the GoI. The Act sets out guidelines to
protect the identity of the complainant(s). Over the last decade, the state Vigilance Commission has not received any
complaints about elements/aspects covered under the Program boundary, or for any work of the GoCG in the school

21 Contracts with estimated values exceeding the monetary amounts that require mandatory review by the Bank’s operations Procurement Review Committee - US$75
million for works, US$50 million for goods and non-consulting services, and US$20 million for consultant services

Chhattisgarh: Accelerated Learning for a Knowledge-Economy (P179249)

education sector. To facilitate appropriate monitoring of activities under the Program, the DoSE, GoCG will ensure that
the World Bank has access to the Vigilance Commission in a timely manner, as needed, or as part of any follow-up the
Bank conducts concerning complaints reported or issues observed as a part of the CHALK operation.

65.
Applicability of the World Bank’s Anti-Corruption Guidelines to the operation. The Program will be subject to
the World Bank’s Governance and Anti-Corruption Guidelines22. As there is no distinction between Bank-funded activities
and GoCG-funded activities within the Program boundary, these guidelines shall be applied in an unrestricted manner to
all activities within the Program boundary. Requirements under these guidelines include but are not limited to (a) the
borrower’s obligation to inform the World Bank about all fraud- and corruption-related allegations and investigations;
(b) the World Bank’s right to conduct administrative inquiries regarding fraud and corruption allegations; and (c) the
ineligibility of World Bank debarred firms for contract awards.

C. Environmental and Social
66.
Overview: An Environmental and Social Systems Assessment (ESSA) for the CHALK Program has been completed in
line with the World Bank’s Guidance for conducting ESSA for PforR financing operations. The findings and recommendations
of the ESSA are based on the review of relevant environmental and social (E&S) management systems of the SS program in
Chhattisgarh, consultations with key staff at SS-SIS, SCERT, SIEMAT, PWD, RES, DoTSC, district and block level staff of DoSE,
school principals and teachers, and with SMC members, along with primary field visit to districts and schools in
Chhattisgarh. Consultations were also undertaken with NGOs working in the education sector in Chhattisgarh.

67.
Environment and Social Risks/Impacts: The overall E&S impacts of the Program are likely to be positive owing to
benefits from enhanced quality of schools and teachers’ capacity and improved learning environment. The Program does
not anticipate any land acquisition and/or any land restriction, and where required will use land available with GoCG. The
key social risks and impacts emerge from (a) weak institutional capacity for E&S activity implementation, (b) gap in following
any fire safety norms in the schools, (c) lack of provisions for universal access to students and teachers, (d) lack of a
mechanism for the maintenance of various facilities and equipment leading to disruption in services, (e) lack of systematic
need assessment and planning for infrastructure in schools, (f) over-crowding of students in tribal hostels, (g) lack of
geographic and needs-based planning to ensure equity and access, especially among tribal and backward areas, and (h)
need for strengthening grievance redress mechanism for a system of escalation and consolidated monitoring and reporting.

68.
On the Environment side, there is a need for (a) institutional capacity development for environmental aspects at
the state, District, School, and SMC Levels, (b) training on environmental management, and (c) strengthening of guidelines
and preparation of online tools to aid monitoring and long-term maintenance of facilities, equipment, and school
environment. Environmental risks and impacts associated with the location of school premises, air/noise pollution in mining
areas, dust and disposal of construction waste, resource utilization during construction, improper disposal of solid waste,
lack of proper e-waste management, water, sanitation, and hygiene issues, lack of proper drinking water, not choosing
correct tree species for air/noise pollution reduction as per local biodiversity; and limited integration of renewable energy
in school designs.  Occupational Health and Safety (OHS) and Community Health and Safety (CHS) issues include fire and
electric safety, possible traffic incidents with construction vehicles on site; disruptions to school activities during the
construction period, and possible health and safety issues for the students, teachers, workers, and the community.

69.
Assessment of borrower’s capacity and systems: Capacities and systems at the SIS-SS, PWD, and RES were
assessed.  The SS guidelines provide the institutional mechanism for program implementation along with detailed roles and

22 Guidelines on Preventing and Combating Fraud and Corruption in Program-for-Results Financing’ dated February 1, 2012 and revised on July 10,2015

Chhattisgarh: Accelerated Learning for a Knowledge-Economy (P179249)

responsibilities that are being followed in the state. It also follows the process of consultations with various stakeholders,
and community mobilization. It aims to create transparency and accountability in the program implementation at the
school level through the participation of community members and other stakeholders in SMCs. While the SIS-SS, follows
the SS guidelines, it requires the capacity enhancement and further strengthening of coordination mechanisms with other
GoCG departments and stakeholders both at state and district levels. The PWD has the capacity to undertake the school
construction work, as they have experience in constructing and maintaining schools.  They have their structural design,
electrical, and mechanical teams, laboratories to test water portability, and the ability to connect with other agencies, as
needed, to meet any specific needs required by the individual clients.   The RES department has a presence in each district
and works together with the district collectors. They have the capacity for all kinds of repair, maintenance, and small
construction work. Offlate, civil works across schools have mostly been managed by the RES.

70.
Recommended Measures to Strengthen Environmental and Social Systems: The recommendations focus on (i)
Screening for E&S risks/ impacts for all civil works; (ii) Mechanism of developing a School Improvement Plan by the
SMCs/SDMCs before initiating detailed DPR preparation for the composite school infrastructure; (iii) School design for
composite schools to ensure multiple entry-exit points, fire safety features, and universal access features in line with SSF
guideline and National Disaster Management guidelines for school safety; (iv) undertake need assessment for the hostel
facilities based on secondary information available with SS-SIS, DoSE, and DoTSC; (v) develop a mechanism for enhanced
capacity and participation of SMC/ SDMC in decision making for school improvement plan, and monitoring and
maintenance of equipment and facilities; and (vi) strengthening grievance redress mechanism especially for escalation
systems and consolidated monitoring and reporting. In addition, the SS-SIS should also include nodal officials/experts
responsible for coordinating, guiding, supervising, and implementing key E&S actions. Further, the recommendations focus
on (i) Establishing a protocol to convey the requirements (including feedback from existing users) of the DoSE to PWD and
RES for comprehensive planning of the required buildings; (ii) Ensuring timely inputs of other departments viz. Public Health
Engineering, Horticulture, Ground Water Board, etc. in the design process; (iii) Inclusion of design agencies with defined
scope to ensure the buildings are designed as per site conditions and green building principles; (iv) Establishing in-house
E&S expertise to ensure sustainability principles are followed in the design and management of schools; and (v) Preparing
checklists and procedures to include environmental, social, H&S aspects in the supervision and monitoring mechanism.

71.
Climate and disaster risk screening. The potential risks due to hazards resulting from climate change are low for
the proposed education facilities. Potential identified risks will be mitigated by: (a) enhancing the design and specifications
for facilities, and (b) carrying out periodic social audits for their maintenance, and school-level DRM readiness. The
digitization of school records will help prevent the loss of data due to climate-induced incidents. Strategies for mitigating
learning loss due to unplanned school closure will help protect the learning gains expected from the operation. CHALK will
also support the setting up of environment clubs across schools.

72.
Chhattisgarh also needs to mitigate the impact of climate change and focus on opportunities provided by green
growth in the years to come. The state faces vulnerabilities to current and future climate change, posing threats to its
natural resources, and communities. By 2050 the state is likely to experience more erratic temperatures, an increase of 12 degrees Celsius, and more heavy precipitation events. Many of these risks are expected to be further accentuated by
climate change and could undermine educational attainment for Chhattisgarh’s large young demographic. Chhattisgarh is
also home to some of the major coalfields in India. As a result, there is a significant dependence on coal mining, coal-based
power, and other coal-dependent industries in the state for employment, income generation, and public revenue. India's
long-term goal of reaching net zero by 2070 and endorsements for clean technology will result in the gradual closure of
coal mines that produce 85 percent of the country's coal over the next 20 to 30 years. There will be a need for
reskilling/upskilling for alternative jobs. As the vehicle for adaptation, mitigation, and transformation, education that aims
to facilitate this transition for adolescents who are about to enter the workforce and make school infrastructure resilient

Chhattisgarh: Accelerated Learning for a Knowledge-Economy (P179249)

will be critical. CHALK will help support such a just transition.

73.
Climate Co-Benefits: The climate-induced incidents weaken the education system by disrupting the regular
academic calendar. Localized school closures pose challenges that need to be addressed in any education Program. The
operation aims to address aspects of climate vulnerability. It has a twin focus on reducing vulnerability to climate change
and fostering green skills in schools. Across the four result areas, the Program adopts a whole-school approach to
addressing climate challenges through both hard infrastructure solutions and soft capacity-building solutions. RA-1 will
focus on educating teachers on climate adaptation and mitigation strategies, as well as improving learning assessment
methods to test students' understanding and awareness of key climate change concepts regularly. RA-2 and RA-3 will
include digitization initiatives and expand the existing curriculum to promote climate and environmental learning at the
school level. It will also provide educators with digital competencies to improve their ability to respond to climate
emergencies. RA-4 will climate-proof school infrastructure and facilities to promote safe school operations. Further, several
model schools to be upgraded under CHALK are expected to be in areas that house coal-fired power plants and coal mines.

74.
Gender and SRGBV: CHALK aims to carry out layered investments23 to respond to gender-related challenges at the
senior secondary education level. The state has already initiated investments in expanding access to quality science and
commerce education at the senior secondary level. This is proving to be effective in attracting students to attend school
and preventing dropouts. This approach will be further promoted under CHALK to address the perceived opportunity cost
of being in school. To further enable access to such schools in areas where topographic issues create a physical barrier to
access, residential facilities24 for boys will be financed under CHALK. Residential facilities for girls are already supported
under the SS scheme of GoI of which the state is a part, and in case there is an absence of such facilities for girls, leading to
barriers to access to schooling, CHALK will be open to funding the development of residential facilities for girls as well. By
doing so, CHALK will continue to maintain the gains that the state has and/or will manage to introduce for both girls and
boys. To further complement these efforts, the state will also leverage CHALK to invest in capacity-building support for
school principals on: (a) community mobilization for facilitating enrolment of students (boys and girls) in senior secondary
schooling and for checking school dropouts; and (b) sensitizing the stakeholders on the aspects of SRGBV, especially given
CHALK’s support to the development of residential facilities for students. In the area of SRGBV, CHALK aligns with the best
practices for addressing SEA/SH in Human Development operations. The training to be provided to school leaders in this
area will build on the country systems. The Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012, and the Prevention of
Sexual Harassment at the Workplace Act, 2013 will provide the reference point for developing and rolling out the training.
75.
Citizen Engagement: CHALK will incentivize reforms in the process of managing model composite schools by
incentivizing the state to strengthen feedback channels available to the community. Under RA-3, the Program will support
the rollout of a system of periodic, community led school social audits, where parents and other community members will
be invited to provide feedback on school performance. This will include aspects related to inclusion, school safety, SRGBV,
timely provision of student entitlements (textbooks, uniforms, and scholarships), teaching practices and quality, and school
infrastructure availability and maitenance. Subsequently, efforts will be made to adapt this framework for all schools across
the state. This has also been adopted as one of the key intermediate outcome indicators (Improved school management
and accountability through a community-led social audit tool) for the operation.

76.
Grievance Redress: Communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely affected as a result of a Bank
supported PforR Program, as defined by the applicable policy and procedures, may submit complaints to the existing
program grievance mechanism or the Bank’s Grievance Redress Service (GRS). The GRS ensures that complaints received
are promptly reviewed to address pertinent concerns. Project affected communities and individuals may submit their

23 CHALK will not support scholarships and stipends for students as this is outside the Program Boundary. Further, the SS and State funds already provide such incentives.
24 Only the capital expenditure of residential facility development and not the recurring costs associated with the management of such facilities.

Chhattisgarh: Accelerated Learning for a Knowledge-Economy (P179249)

Results Framework
COUNTRY: India
Chhattisgarh: Accelerated Learning for a Knowledge-Economy

Program Development Objective(s)
To improve the quality of school education & access to science & commerce senior secondary education

Program Development Objective Indicators by Objectives/Outcomes

RESULT_FRAME_TBL_PDO

Indicator Name
DLI Baseline
Intermediate Targets
End Target

To improve the quality of school education & access to science & commerce senior secondary education
Increase in percentage of
Grade 4 students at and above
grade level proficiency in
Language and Math (Text)
DLI 1 Baseline to be
established in year 1
Gender disaggregated
baseline established
No Result
2 percentage points
increase each for boys
and girls over the
baseline for each subject
No Result
4 percentage points
increase each for boys
and girls over the
baseline for each subject
Increase in school completion
rate at the secondary level
(Text)
DLI 2
Post-COVID, genderdisaggregated baseline to
be established in Year 1
Baseline established
based on examination
results for the academic
year 2022-23
No Result
3 and 2 percentage
points improvement
over baseline for boys
and girls respectively
No Result
6 and 4 percentage
points improvement
over baseline for boys
and girls respectively
Increase in science and
commerce senior secondary
education enrolment in
government schools (Text)
DLI 3
Girls’ and boys’
enrolment is 153,335,
and 107,330 respectively
Girls’ and boys’
enrolment increased to
160,335, and 115,330
respectively
No Result
Girls’ and boys’
enrolment increased to
163,335 and 119,830
respectively
No Result
Girls’ and boys’
enrolment increased to
166,335 and 124,330
respectively
.
.
Intermediate Results Indicator by Results Areas

ANNEX 1. RESULTS FRAMEWORK MATRIX

Chhattisgarh: Accelerated Learning for a Knowledge-Economy (P179249)

RESULT_FRAME_TBL_IO

Indicator Name
DLI Baseline
Intermediate Targets
End Target

RA 1 – Improved in-service professional development support for teachers
Improved teacher capacity to
support the utilization of TaRL
and climate change education
in the primary grades (Text)
DLI 4
The system lacks a
structured long-term term
in-service teacher training
program on TaRL
60-day multi-year inservice training program
created on TaRL and
climate change
education
75 percent of teachers
complete 15 days of
training
75 percent of teachers
complete 30 cumulative
days of training
75 percent of teachers
complete 45 cumulative
days of training
75 percent of teachers
complete 60 cumulative
days of training
Improved provision of needbased in-service training
(including climate change
education) for Grade 6 to 10
teachers (Text)
DLI 5
A system of need-based
teacher training is
available but yet to be
operationalized
75 percent of teachers
are oriented on a system
for reporting their
training needs
15 percent of teachers
are provided with access
to quality need-based
teacher training
30 percent of teachers
are provided with access
to quality need-based
training
50 percent of teachers
are provided with access
to quality need-based
training
70 percent of teachers are
provided with access to
quality need-based
training
Increase in availability of grade
and subject-wise lesson plans
including those for climate
change education (Text)
No lesson plans available
for teachers
Subject-wise lesson
plans covering climate
education for Grades 6,
7, 9, and 11 prepared &
provided to teachers
Subject-wise lesson
plans covering climate
education for Grades 8,
10, and 12 prepared &
provided to teachers
No Result
No Result
No Result
RA 2 – Improved, centrally developed, and digitally enabled student diagnostic and assessment system
Increase in the use of
diagnostic assessment tools for
the provision of remedial
support (Text)
DLI 6
State is in the process of
initiating a system of
standardized diagnostic
assessments and remedial
education
One centrally managed
diagnostic assessment
completed
Three centrally managed
diagnostic assessments
completed
Three centrally managed
diagnostic assessments
completed during the
year with at least one
being digitally supported
Three centrally
managed, and digitally
supported diagnostic
assessments completed
during the year
No Result
RA 3 – Decentralized school development and management for efficient and effective operation
Increase in the number of
model composite schools with
disaster resilient and energy
efficient facilities and offering
science and commerce senior
secondary education (Text)
DLI 7
Several large and/or
composite schools; but
student enrolment,
teacher availability, and
availability of facilities
vary leading to inefficient
and ineffective operation
300 existing schools with
adequate infrastructure/
facilities adopt quality
reforms to meet the
model composite
schools’ status
150 existing schools
adopt quality reforms
associated with the
model composite
schools and become
eligible to receive
investments for facility
upgradation
Facility upgradation
work completed across
150 existing schools that
have adopted quality
reforms associated with
the model composite
schools
300 existing schools
adopt quality reforms
associated with the
model composite
schools and become
eligible to receive
investments for facility
upgradation
Facility upgradation work
completed across 300
existing schools that have
adopted quality reforms
associated with the model
composite schools

Chhattisgarh: Accelerated Learning for a Knowledge-Economy (P179249)

RESULT_FRAME_TBL_IO

Indicator Name
DLI Baseline
Intermediate Targets
End Target

Improved school management
and accountability through a
community-led social audit
tool (Text)
A system of periodic,
community-led school
social audits yet to be
developed and
operationalized
School social audit tool
developed for model
schools and used to
establish a baseline
No Result
At least 250 model
composite schools show
a 20 percent
improvement over the
baseline
At least 500 model
composite schools show
a 20 percent
improvement over the
baseline
Social audit tool for model
schools adapted and
rolled out as a pilot in
select governmentmanaged schools
RA 4 - School leadership development
Improved leadership
competencies of school
principals and better capacity
in the area of DRM and SRGBV
(Text)
DLI 8
No tool to measure
leadership competencies,
and limited in-service
professional development
support for school leaders
Standardized selfassessment tool
developed and baseline
proficiency estimated of
school leaders on 12 key
leadership competencies
90 percent of school
leaders are trained in
school safety, DRM, and
SRGBV
25 percent of school
leaders demonstrate
advanced proficiency in
at least 4 additional
leadership competencies
over the baseline
No Result
60 percent of school
leaders demonstrate
advanced proficiency in at
least 4 additional
leadership competencies
over the baseline
Fiduciary systems strengthening
Improved, decentralized
financial and procurement
management capacity (Text)
DLI 9
Lack of structured
capacity building support
for staff responsible for
financial management
and procurement
Study completed on
areas for strengthening
decentralized financial
management and
reform action plan
finalized
Independent
procurement audit
completed and reform
action plan for
improving procurement
management finalized
by SIS-SS
Training module
developed and used for
training of 90 percent of
fiduciary staff
No Result
Five most critical reform
actions identified through
the FM study and
procurement audit
implemented
Corporate Indicators
Students benefiting from direct
interventions to enhance
learning (CRI, Number)
3,975,000.00
3,975,000.00
3,975,000.00
3,975,000.00
3,975,000.00
3,975,000.00
Students benefiting from
direct interventions to
enhance learning - Female
(CRI, Number)
2,050,000.00
2,050,000.00
2,050,000.00
2,050,000.00
2,050,000.00
2,050,000.00
Large-scale primary/secondary
learning assessments
completed (Number)
0.00
1.00
1.00
2.00
2.00
3.00

Chhattisgarh: Accelerated Learning for a Knowledge-Economy (P179249)

. .
Monitoring & Evaluation Plan: PDO Indicators
Indicator Name
Definition/Description
Frequency
Datasource
Methodology for Data
Collection
Responsibility for Data
Collection
Increase in percentage of Grade 4
students at and above grade level
proficiency in Language and Math
The indicator tracks gender
disaggregated increase in
the percentage of students
at or above grade level
proficiency
Years 1, 3,
and 5

Electronic rec
ords and/or
state
EMIS data

Data from SLAS
conducted and analyzed
by the SAC

DoSE, GoCG

Increase in school completion rate at the
secondary level
The indicator tracks
improvement in the
percentage of students
enrolled in Grade 9 who
clear the Grade 10
secondary school leaving
examination(s) with a
simultaneous reduction in
the existing gender gap
Years 2 and
Electronic rec
ords and/or
education
MIS data

Grade 9 enrolment data
from state EMIS and
Grade 10 state
examination
board results

DoSE, GoCG

Increase in science and commerce senior
secondary education enrolment in
government schools
The indicator tracks
improvement in science
and commerce senior
secondary education
enrolment with a
simultaneous reduction in
the existing gender gap
Years 1, 3,
and 5

Electronic rec
ords and/or E
ducation
MIS data

Grade 11 and 12
enrolment data from
state EMIS

DoSE, GoCG

. .
Monitoring & Evaluation Plan: Intermediate Results Indicators
Indicator Name
Definition/Description
Frequency
Datasource
Methodology for Data
Collection
Responsibility for Data
Collection
Improved teacher capacity to support the
utilization of TaRL and climate change
education in the primary grades
The indicator tracks the
completion of a multi year,
short term, in-service
training program on TaRL
Annual

Electronic rec
ords or state
EMIS data

Training progress
and completion data
uploaded by SCERT

DoSE, GoCG

Chhattisgarh: Accelerated Learning for a Knowledge-Economy (P179249)

and climate education for
primary school teachers
Improved provision of need-based inservice training (including climate change
education) for Grade 6 to 10 teachers
The indicator tracks the
percentage of teachers
provided with training in
line with the specific needs
reported by them
Annual

Electronic rec
ords or state
EMIS data

Training progress
and completion data
uploaded by SCERT

DoSE, GoCG

Increase in availability of grade and
subject-wise lesson plans including those
for climate change education
The indicator tracks the
development and
distribution of quality,
subject wise lesson plans
for grades 6 to 12;
including those for climate
change education
Year 1 and
Copies of
lesson plans
developed;
and
distribution
data

SCERT publication and
distribution data
submitted by SCERT

DoSE, GoCG

Increase in the use of diagnostic
assessment tools for the provision of
remedial support
The indicators tracks the
technical strengthening
and gradual technology
enablement of periodic
diagnostic assessments
Annual
(Except
Year 5)

Electronic rec
ords or State
EMIS data

Data to be submitted
by school teachers
and collated by the
SCERT Assessment Cell

DoSE, GoCG

Increase in the number of model
composite schools with disaster resilient
and energy efficient facilities and offering
science and commerce senior secondary
education
The indicator tracks an
increase in the number of
model composite schools
operating with high
enrolment, adequate
teacher availability and
learning facilities, school
leader appointed on merit,
semi-autonomous school
management; and having
disaster resilient and
energy efficient facilities.
Annual

Electronic rec
ords and/or
state EMIS
data

School level enrolment,
staffing, and facilities
records

DoSE, GoCG

Improved school management and
accountability through a community-led
The indicator tracks
improvement in model
Annual
(Except
Model,
composite
Social audit reports
collated and analyzed by DoSE, GoCG

Chhattisgarh: Accelerated Learning for a Knowledge-Economy (P179249)

social audit tool
composite schools'
performance on a social
audit tool covering aspects
related to teachers,
inclusion, safety, and
facilities maintenance.
Year 2)

schools'
annual social
audit reports

the SCERT

Improved leadership competencies of
school principals and better capacity in
the area of DRM and SRGBV
The indicator tracks the
improvement of key
leadership competencies of
school leaders; and an
improvement in their
understanding of DRM and
SRGBV
Annual
(Except
Year 4)

Electronic rec
ords or state
EMIS data

Collated and analyzed,
annual self assessment
data for school leaders

DoSE, GoCG

Improved, decentralized financial and
procurement management capacity
The indicator tracks
provision of contextually
relevant capacity building
support to fiduciary staff
Years 1, 2,
3. and 5

Official
reports; and
training
completion
records
FM study report and
independent
procurement audit
report;

DoSE, GoCG

Students benefiting from direct
interventions to enhance learning

Annual

State
EMIS data

Data from
school enrolment
registers
DoSE, GoCG

Students benefiting from direct
interventions to enhance learning -
Female

Annual

State EMIS
data

Data from
school enrolment
registers
DoSE, GoCG

Large-scale primary/secondary learning
assessments completed

Years 1, 3,
and 5

SLAS Reports

Summary
report published by the
SCERT Assessment Cell
DoSE, GoCG

.

Chhattisgarh: Accelerated Learning for a Knowledge-Economy (P179249)

 .
\
. .
Disbursement Linked Indicators Matrix

DLI_TBL_MATRIX

DLI 1
Increase in percentage of Grade 4 students at and above grade level proficiency in Language and Math
Type of DLI
Scalability
Unit of Measure
Total Allocated Amount (USD)
As % of Total Financing Amount
Outcome
Yes
Text
26,000,000.00 9.37
Period
Value
Allocated Amount (USD) Formula
Baseline
Baseline to be established in year 1
Prior Results
No Prior Results
0.00 NA
July 2023 to June 2024
Baseline score established by SLAS of SAC
10,000,000.00 $10M on target achievement
July 2024 to June 2025
No Target
0.00 NA
July 2025 to June 2026
2 percentage points increase each over the
baseline for language and math
8,000,000.00 $200k per 0.1 percentage point
July 2026 to June 2027
No Target
0.00 NA
July 2027 to June 2028
Additional 2 percentage points increase each
over the baseline for language and math
8,000,000.00 $200k per 0.1 percentage point

DLI_TBL_MATRIX

DLI 2
Increase in school completion rate at the secondary level
Type of DLI
Scalability
Unit of Measure
Total Allocated Amount (USD)
As % of Total Financing Amount
Outcome
Yes
Text
10,000,000.00 3.60
Period
Value
Allocated Amount (USD) Formula
ANNEX 2. DISBURSEMENT LINKED INDICATORS, DISBURSEMENT ARRANGEMENTS AND VERIFICATION PROTOCOLS

Chhattisgarh: Accelerated Learning for a Knowledge-Economy (P179249)

Baseline
Baseline to be established in Year 1

Prior Results
No Prior Results
0.00 NA
July 2023 to June 2024
Baseline established based on 2022-23 exam
0.00 NA
July 2024 to June 2025
No Target
0.00 NA
July 2025 to June 2026
2.5 percentage points increase
5,000,000.00 $200k per 0.1 percentage point
July 2026 to June 2027
No Target
0.00 NA
July 2027 to June 2028
Additional 2.5 percentage points increase
5,000,000.00 $200k per 0.1 percentage point

DLI_TBL_MATRIX

DLI 3
Increase in science and commerce senior secondary education enrolment in government schools
Type of DLI
Scalability
Unit of Measure
Total Allocated Amount (USD)
As % of Total Financing Amount
Outcome
Yes
Text
24,000,000.00 8.65
Period
Value
Allocated Amount (USD) Formula
Baseline
260,655 students
Prior Results
No Prior Result
0.00 NA
July 2023 to June 2024
15,000 increase over baseline
12,000,000.00 $400k per 500 students
July 2024 to June 2025
No Target
0.00 NA
July 2025 to June 2026
Additional 7,500 increase over baseline
6,000,000.00 $400k per 500 students
July 2026 to June 2027
No Target
0.00 NA
July 2027 to June 2028
Additional 7,500 increase over baseline
6,000,000.00 $400k per 500 students

Chhattisgarh: Accelerated Learning for a Knowledge-Economy (P179249)

DLI_TBL_MATRIX

DLI 4
Improved teacher capacity to support the utilization of TaRL and climate change education in the primary grades
Type of DLI
Scalability
Unit of Measure
Total Allocated Amount (USD)
As % of Total Financing Amount
Intermediate Outcome
Yes
Text
15,000,000.00 5.41
Period
Value
Allocated Amount (USD) Formula
Baseline
The system lacks a structured long-term term inservice teacher training program on TaRL
Prior Results
No Prior Result
0.00 NA
July 2023 to June 2024
60-day in-service training program created on
TaRL and climate change education by SCERT
4,500,000.00 $4.5M on completion of program
design
July 2024 to June 2025
75 percent of teachers complete up to 15 days of
training coordinated by SCERT
2,625,000.00 $175k per day of training
July 2025 to June 2026
75 percent of teachers complete up to 30
cumulative days of training coordinated by SCERT
2,625,000.00 $175k per day of training
July 2026 to June 2027
75 percent of teachers complete up to 45
cumulative days of training coordinated by SCERT
2,625,000.00 $175k per day of training
July 2027 to June 2028
75 percent of teachers complete up to 60
cumulative days of training coordinated by SCERT
2,625,000.00 $175k per day of training

DLI_TBL_MATRIX

DLI 5
Improved provision of need-based in-service training (including climate change education) for Grade 6 to 10 teachers
Type of DLI
Scalability
Unit of Measure
Total Allocated Amount (USD)
As % of Total Financing Amount
Intermediate Outcome
Yes
Text
17,500,000.00 6.31
Period
Value
Allocated Amount (USD) Formula

Chhattisgarh: Accelerated Learning for a Knowledge-Economy (P179249)

Baseline
A system of need-based teacher training is
available but yet to be operationalized; No lesson
plans available for teachers
Prior Results
No Prior Result
0.00 NA
July 2023 to June 2024
75 percent of Grade 6 to 10 teachers are oriented
on a system for selecting and reporting their
individual training needs by the SCERT
1,000,000.00 $1M on target achievement
July 2024 to June 2025
Subject-wise lesson plans including climate
change education prepared and distributed to all
Grade 6 to 12 teachers by SCERT
6,000,000.00 $6M on target achievement
July 2025 to June 2026
30 percent of teachers provided with need-based
training coordinated by SCERT
4,500,000.00 $150k per 1 percentage point
July 2026 to June 2027
No Target
0.00 NA
July 2027 to June 2028
An additional 40 percent of teachers provided
with need-based training coordinated by SCERT
6,000,000.00 $150k per 1 percentage point

DLI_TBL_MATRIX

DLI 6
Increase in the use of diagnostic assessment tools for the provision of remedial support
Type of DLI
Scalability
Unit of Measure
Total Allocated Amount (USD)
As % of Total Financing Amount
Intermediate Outcome
Yes
Text
15,000,000.00 5.41
Period
Value
Allocated Amount (USD) Formula
Baseline
State is in the process of initiating a system of
standardized diagnostic assessments and
remedial education
Prior Results
No Prior Result
0.00 NA

Chhattisgarh: Accelerated Learning for a Knowledge-Economy (P179249)

July 2023 to June 2024
At least one centrally managed diagnostic
assessment completed by the SAC
3,000,000.00 $3M on target achievement
July 2024 to June 2025
The frequency of SAC-managed diagnostic
assessments increased by up to 2 additional
rounds per year
4,000,000.00 $2M per additional assessment
July 2025 to June 2026
One round of digitally enabled, diagnostic
assessment completed by SAC
5,000,000.00 $5M on target achievement
July 2026 to June 2027
Frequency of digitally enabled, SAC managed
diagnostic assessments increased by up to 2
additional rounds per year
3,000,000.00 $1.5M per additional digitally
supported assessment
July 2027 to June 2028
No Target
0.00 NA

DLI_TBL_MATRIX

DLI 7
Increase in the number of model composite schools with disaster resilient and energy efficient facilities and offering science
and commerce senior secondary education
Type of DLI
Scalability
Unit of Measure
Total Allocated Amount (USD)
As % of Total Financing Amount
Intermediate Outcome
Yes
Text
150,000,000.00 54.05
Period
Value
Allocated Amount (USD) Formula
Baseline
Several large and/or composite schools; but
student enrolment, teacher availability, and
availability of facilities vary. Construction does
not use energy and water efficient fixtures.
Prior Results
300 existing semi-autonomous schools with
adequate facilities adopt model composite school
quality reforms
50,000,000.00 $500K for every 3 schools
July 2023 to June 2024
150 existing schools adopt model composite
25,000,000.00 $500K for every 3 schools

Chhattisgarh: Accelerated Learning for a Knowledge-Economy (P179249)

school quality reforms and become eligible to
receive investments for facility upgradation
July 2024 to June 2025
Facility upgradation work with energy and water
efficient fixtures and disaster resilient design
completed across 150 schools that have adopted
model composite school quality reforms
25,000,000.00 $500K for every 3 schools
July 2025 to June 2026
Additional 150 schools adopt model composite
school quality reforms and become eligible to
receive investments for facility upgradation
25,000,000.00 $500K for every 3 schools
July 2026 to June 2027
Facility upgradation work with energy and water
efficient fixtures and disaster resilient design
completed across additional 150 schools that
have adopted model composite school quality
reforms
25,000,000.00 $500K for every 3 schools
July 2027 to June 2028
No Target
0.00 NA

DLI_TBL_MATRIX

DLI 8
Improved leadership competencies of school principals and better capacity in the area of DRM and SRGBV
Type of DLI
Scalability
Unit of Measure
Total Allocated Amount (USD)
As % of Total Financing Amount
Intermediate Outcome
Yes
Text
15,000,000.00 5.41
Period
Value
Allocated Amount (USD) Formula
Baseline
No tool to measure leadership competencies,
and limited in-service professional development
support for school leaders
Prior Results
No Prior Result
0.00 NA
July 2023 to June 2024
Standardized tool developed by SIEMAT for self1,800,000.00 $1M on target achievement

Chhattisgarh: Accelerated Learning for a Knowledge-Economy (P179249)

assessment based baseline of school leaders’
proficiency on 12 key leadership competencies
July 2024 to June 2025
90 percent of school leaders are trained in school
safety and DRM, and SRGBV
6,000,000.00 $6M and $0.8M on completion of
DRM and SRGBV training
July 2025 to June 2026
25 percent of school leaders demonstrate
advanced proficiency in at least 4 additional
leadership competencies over baseline
3,000,000.00 $120K per 1 percentage point up to
a max of $3M
July 2026 to June 2027
No Target
0.00 NA
July 2027 to June 2028
Additional 35 percent of school leaders
demonstrate advanced proficiency in at least 4
additional leadership competencies over baseline
4,200,000.00 $120K per 1 percentage point up to
a max of $4.2M

DLI_TBL_MATRIX

DLI 9
Improved, decentralized financial and procurement management capacity
Type of DLI
Scalability
Unit of Measure
Total Allocated Amount (USD)
As % of Total Financing Amount
Intermediate Outcome
Yes
Text
5,000,000.00 1.80
Period
Value
Allocated Amount (USD) Formula
Baseline
Lack of capacity-building support for Financial
Management and Procurement staff
Prior Results
No Prior Result
0.00 NA
July 2023 to June 2024
Study on areas for strengthening decentralized
financial management and reform action plan
completed by SIS-SS
2,000,000.00 US$2M on target completion
July 2024 to June 2025
Independent procurement audit completed and
reform action plan for improving procurement
2,000,000.00 US$2M on target completion

Chhattisgarh: Accelerated Learning for a Knowledge-Economy (P179249)

management finalized by SIS-SS
July 2025 to June 2026
Training module developed and used for training
of 90 percent of fiduciary staff by SIS-SS
500,000.00 US$500k on target completion
July 2026 to June 2027
No Target
0.00 NA
July 2027 to June 2028
Five most critical reform actions identified
through the FM study and procurement audit
implemented by SIS-SS
500,000.00 US$500k on target completion
 . .
Verification Protocol Table: Disbursement Linked Indicators

DLI_TBL_VERIFICATION

DLI 1
Increase in percentage of Grade 4 students at and above grade level proficiency in Language and Math
Description
DLI tracks an increase in the percentage of students at or above grade level proficiency in language and math at Grade 4
level. At the baseline, the indicator will involve the clear definition of learning standards and proficiency levels,
development of a sampling framework for the assessment, development of quality test items, standardization of test
administration procedures, and an analysis framework for clear utility of results.
Data source/ Agency
Official SLAS data and/or report of the DoSE, GoCG
Verification Entity
IVA
Procedure
Biennial field based observation to check that SLAS is scored appropriately, and results collated without any manipulation

DLI_TBL_VERIFICATION

DLI 2
Increase in school completion rate at the secondary level
Description
DLI tracks the number of students passing their grade 10 examination as a percentage of the number of children enrolled in
grade 9 in the previous year.
Data source/ Agency
Official results published by the state examination board, and state EMIS data for student enrolment records
Verification Entity
IVA
Procedure
Desk based triangulation of exam results (pass percentages) and previous year's grade 9 enrolment data from state's EMIS

Chhattisgarh: Accelerated Learning for a Knowledge-Economy (P179249)

DLI_TBL_VERIFICATION

DLI 3
Increase in science and commerce senior secondary education enrolment in government schools
Description
DLI tracks gradual improvement in enrolment and retention in science and commerce streams at the senior secondary
(Grades 11 and 12) level resulting from improved availability of seats in government-managed schools. At least 5 percent of
the increase to be recorded in schools located in coal mining blocks of the state.
Data source/ Agency
Annual school-level enrolment records collated in the state EMIS
Verification Entity
IVA
Procedure
Desk based verification of year on year enrolment trends followed by phone based verification of enrolment records with a
sample of 370 senior secondary schools' principals.

DLI_TBL_VERIFICATION

DLI 4
Improved teacher capacity to support the utilization of TaRL and climate change education in the primary grades
Description
The indicator tracks the development, rollout, and completion of a short-term, in-service, multi-year course for primary
grade teachers on TaRL, and climate change education.
Data source/ Agency
Training progress and completion data uploaded by the SCERT, and shared by the DoSE, GoCG
Verification Entity
IVA
Procedure
Year 1: Desk based verification of training program/course design document against grade 1-5, subject-wise learning
competencies defined by the NCERT. Year 2 to 5: Classroom-based observation of a sample of randomly selected 370
teachers to check if they are managing teaching-learning interactions under the TaRL approach and have better
understanding of climate change education; and can on an average, correctly respond to three of five questions on checks
for understanding related to the training received in the year.

DLI_TBL_VERIFICATION

DLI 5
Improved provision of need-based in-service training (including climate change education) for Grade 6 to 10 teachers
Description
DLI tracks the provision of training in line with the professional development needs reported by Grade 6-10 teachers from
within a universe of training modules/options that will include subject-specific and pedagogical trainings, and training on
climate change education aligned with the state curriculum. It also tracks the development and provision of grade wise
lesson plans for all subjects (with climate change related content/education as set out under the learning competencies
defined by the central government) to Grades 6-12 teachers.
Data source/ Agency
Publication and distribution records for lesson plans; and training progress and completion data maintained by the SCERT
Verification Entity
IVA

Chhattisgarh: Accelerated Learning for a Knowledge-Economy (P179249)

Procedure
Year 1: Phone based verification survey with 370 randomly selected teachers to check for successful training completion
| Year 2: Lesson plans developed must score an average score of at least 75 percent on the 'Lesson Plan and Guidebook
Quality Assessment Framework/Tool' developed by the World Bank or an adaptation of the same; and school visits to a
randomly selected set of 370 schools should confirm that the lesson plans are available and being used by teachers | Year 3
and 5: Desk-based validation to verify that the list of training options being offered clearly originate from (a) results from
SLAS and periodic diagnostic assessments; and (b) sample-based classroom observations of pedagogical practices. This will
be followed up with annual phone based verification surveys with a sample of 370 randomly selected teachers to verify
completion of annual training(s) in line with needs expressed by them, with the sample of teachers being able to, on an
average, correctly respond to three of five questions on checks for understanding.

DLI_TBL_VERIFICATION

DLI 6
Increase in the use of diagnostic assessment tools for the provision of remedial support
Description
DLI tracks the technical strengthening and technology enablement of school based diagnostic assessments for identification
and correction of learning deficiencies (including those caused by unplanned school closures due to climate change and
climate induced incidents) through remedial education. Each round would cover all grades and subjects. Technology
enablement refers to technology-enabled collection of data, automated analysis, digital record keeping, and online access
to remedial resources to avoid loss of data due to climate induced incidents.
Data source/ Agency
Data submitted by teachers and analyzed by the SCERT Assessment Cell, and shared by the DoSE, GoCG
Verification Entity
IVA
Procedure
Phone based verification surveys with school principal, head teacher or teacher(s) from a randomly selected sample of 370
schools to verify that diagnostic assessments are being carried out as per required frequency, and that in Years 3 and 4,
corresponding remedial resources are being made available to them in a timely manner.

DLI_TBL_VERIFICATION

DLI 7
Increase in the number of model composite schools with disaster resilient and energy efficient facilities and offering
science and commerce senior secondary education
Description
DLI tracks a shift in the model of provision of public (school) education services to focus on (where possible) the setting up
of high enrolment, model composite schools (At least 5 percent in coal mining blocks) with sufficient staff and facilities; and
while doing so expanding access to senior secondary science and commerce education. It also tracks a shift towards
construction with energy and water efficient fixtures, and disaster resilient designs.
Data source/ Agency
School records, construction design and civil works procurement documents, and data from state EMIS
Verification Entity
IVA

Chhattisgarh: Accelerated Learning for a Knowledge-Economy (P179249)

Procedure
Field-based verification of a sample of 170 randomly selected schools to check for school level quality reforms (all
mandatory): (a) semi-autonomous registration status; (b) at least 33 teaching and non-teaching staff with teachers for each
subject; (c) at least 400 students; (d) availability of primary and/or upper primary, secondary, and senior secondary
education; and (e) availability of science and/or commerce stream(s) in the school. In case of schools that receive funds for
facility upgradation check for two mandatory compliances: (a) completion of construction against school DPR that highlights
elements of disaster resilience in design, and (b) use of energy and water efficient fixtures

DLI_TBL_VERIFICATION

DLI 8
Improved leadership competencies of school principals and better capacity in the area of DRM and SRGBV
Description
The indicator tracks the improvement across 12 leadership competencies: self-awareness, self-management,
communication, influence, conflict management, collaboration, managing curriculum & instruction, promoting a learning
culture, coaching & feedback, data driven instruction, managing school resources/systems, and managing financial
resources.
Data source/ Agency
Self-assessment tool results (electronic) collated by SIEMAT, and shared by DoSE, GoCG
Verification Entity
IVA
Procedure
Year 1, 3, and 5: Remote proctoring of a sample of at least 60 self assessment centers each covering at least 50 school
leaders to ensure that they are not communicating with each other and are not being prompted to provide specific
responses | Year 2: Phone based survey with 170 randomly selected school leaders to verify (i) completion of DRM training;
and (ii) completion of SRGBV training with all being able to correctly provide details on where to report cases of SRGBV.

DLI_TBL_VERIFICATION

DLI 9
Improved, decentralized financial and procurement management capacity
Description
DLI tracks research, analysis, and/or independent audit of financial management and procurement systems, processes, and
performance and the subsequent development and rollout of a training module to build capacity of state, district, and block
level financial management and procurement staff on areas for improvement identified by the government.
Data source/ Agency
Reports of DoPI, GoCG and Independent Procurement Auditor; and training completion data/report of DoSE, GoCG
Verification Entity
IVA
Procedure
Year 1: submission of financial management study report; Year 2: submission of independent procurement audit report;
Year 3: phone based telephonic survey of 60 randomly selected state, district, and block level financial management and
procurement staff to check for completion of the training offered by the state; and Year 5: desk-based verification of
documentary proof submitted for verification
 .

Chhattisgarh: Accelerated Learning for a Knowledge-Economy (P179249)

ANNEX 3. (SUMMARY) TECHNICAL ASSESSMENT

1.
Enhancing the quality of school education (student learning levels) in the state whilst expanding access to
science and commerce education at the senior secondary level has been identified as the sector-specific twin goals
by the GoCG. In this regard, the DoSE, GoCG, through the SIS-SS and the SCERT has identified four key challenges that
need to be addressed through adequate reforms: (a) insufficient in-service professional development support and
academic resource materials for teachers; (b) limited use of learning assessment data or information to inform policy,
teacher training, and most importantly, student-specific remedial support at a time when more than 75 percent of Grade
3 students are below grade level proficiency in language and mathematics; (c) limited access to science and commerce
streams at the senior secondary level for students enrolled in schools managed by the GoCG; and (d) insufficient inservice professional development support for school principals and head teachers to manage the type of academic and
management reforms being envisioned under the operation.

2.
An overarching challenge faced by the state’s school education system is the existence of many schools
(especially primary and/or upper primary) with relatively low enrolment and inadequate teachers or subject teachers.
These schools operate with a more than optimal pupil-teacher ratio. However, their low enrolment translates into
multigrade teaching and inadequate facilities since the investment in additional teachers can take multiple years due to
budgetary constraints faced by all states in India. This impacts the number of days of effective learning for students and
results in poor learning levels. Several of these schools are critical for ensuring continued access to school education for
students living in sparsely populated, topographically complex areas. At the same time, there are clear examples of
schools that can be upgraded to model composite setups that have adequate teachers and subject teachers and learning
infrastructure. Preliminary estimates suggest that there are at least 750 to 1,000 schools that can be upgraded to such
a status. These schools can cater to as many as 20 percent of the students enrolled in schools managed by the GoCG
and will employ as many as 7.5 percent of teachers. The resulting budgetary efficiency from these model composite
schools can help free up funds for investment in some of the smaller, low-enrolment schools that are essential for
ensuring universal access to elementary education in the state.

3.
The GoCG views CHALK as an operation that can help realize its vision of transforming school education in the
state and has set an ambitious yet achievable PDO where progress and success under the operation will be measured
through three PDO indicators (details in Section II.D of the main text; and Annexure 1). A set of four results areas, each
responding to one of the four key challenges identified by the state, led by a dedicated nodal educational institution,
and supported by technical experts engaged through the IPF Technical Assistance Component under the CHALK
operation are expected to help the GoCG in realizing its vision for CHALK.

a.
RA-1 focuses on improving the quality of teacher-student interactions by attempting to better utilize
the minimum ten days of in-service training mandated for each teacher in the system. For primary grade
teachers, given the impact of the prolonged school closures due to COVID-19, the existence of multiple low
enrolment primary schools with one or two teachers, and the limited access to quality ECE, supporting a
transition to TaRL in a multigrade-multilingual setup is a priority. A short-term in-service course spread across
three to four years would enable the system to systematically build teachers’ capacity whilst periodically
observing teaching practices through sample-based classroom observations (potentially using the TEACH
classroom observation tool developed by the World Bank). A combination of subject matter expertise and
pedagogical practices will be covered in the course. The said course will engage a combination of in-person,
online, and peer-to-peer learning, coupled with classroom-based coaching (as the system matures). For upper
primary and secondary grade teachers, the priority would be to better utilize evidence on subject matter gaps

Chhattisgarh: Accelerated Learning for a Knowledge-Economy (P179249)

and pedagogical aspects that need to be expediently addressed by the system through the provision of needbased in-service training. Subject matter gaps can be determined through periodic SLAS and/or centrally
designed, school-based formative and summative assessments.  Pedagogical improvements can be arrived at
through sample-based classroom observations of teaching practices (potentially using the TEACH classroom
observation tool developed by the World Bank). In parallel, there will be a shift towards providing teachers with
greater autonomy to customize and plan their annual training calendar and choose the modules that they feel
can best respond to their training needs. In addition, given that there are several cases where teachers are
required to teach subjects they may not have necessarily studied at the higher education level, the provision of
structured lesson plans could help improve the quality of teaching-learning interactions in the classrooms.

b.
RA-2 focuses on improving student diagnostic and assessment systems by helping the system initiate
a process of periodic SLAS and improving the design and utility of the centrally designed, school-based
formative and summative assessments. The priority will be to put in place the systems required to regularly
collect, collate, analyze, and better utilize data required for policy and programmatic responses. Better-designed
school-based formative and summative assessments and the gradual technology enablement of the same can
help reduce the turnaround time for completing the assessments, analyzing results, and providing systemgenerated, customized, student-level remedial resources. In a way, this would mark a shift to more personalized
teaching-learning under a low-technology and low-cost model. Given the current landscape where four to five
SCERT faculty are managing the SAC, improved staffing and dedicated capacity-building support will be a must.

c.
RA-3 focuses on maturing a system of decentralized school development and management for
improving the efficiency and effectiveness of school-level operations. Aligned with the GoCG’s priority of
enhancing access to senior secondary level science and commerce education, especially for SC, ST, OBC, and
girls enrolled in schools managed by the GoCG, the operation will provide them with the opportunity to
benefit from improved facilities and subject teacher availability. Setting up these schools as model composite
setups offering education from Grades 1 to 12, with 700+ students, adequate teachers (including subject
teachers), better school management through the merit-based appointment of school principals, and providing
the school management greater operational autonomy can help in (i) reducing per pupil expenditure and
improving overall operational efficiency, and (ii) improving the quality of teaching-learning interactions resulting
from better availability of teachers and an enhanced learning environment. A shift in this direction could include:
(i) taking up the softer (management and quality-centric) reforms in schools that already have adequate
infrastructure and facilities, and (ii) taking up softer reforms and civil works for learning environment
enhancement in areas where there is sufficient demand from the community. Another priority under this RA
will be to ensure that several of these model composite schools are planned for blocks affected by coal mining,
where a high percentage of the community (especially low-income households) directly or indirectly rely on the
sector for employment and livelihood. With India’s commitment to gradually reducing its dependence on coal
as a source of energy, providing the next generation(s) with the opportunity to pursue careers in other wellpaying areas (a lot of which require science and commerce education at the senior secondary level) is a priority.

d.
RA-4 focuses on improving the quality of in-service professional development opportunities available
for school leaders. The current model of top-down provision of in-service professional development support
will be replaced by a system where school principals will be able to assess themselves on a set of 12, predefined
leadership skills or competencies through a psychometric self-assessment tool built around the World
Management Survey instrument. Subsequently, they will be able to choose from training modules (online and
offline) focused on helping school leaders improve their skills and competencies. Further, the school principals
will be provided with access to structured training on SRGBV and DRM so that they can play a more active role

Chhattisgarh: Accelerated Learning for a Knowledge-Economy (P179249)

in these areas and subsequently work with teachers and the community on these issues.

4.
The use of the IPF Technical Assistance Component to engage the support of technical support agencies is a
significant departure from the status quo and can transform the state of school education service delivery. Like the
landscape across most states in India, each year, 30 to 40+ technical support agencies could be providing pro bono
support to nodal education institutions in the state. They usually raise their funds through corporate social responsibility
contributions and enter memorandums of understanding with the state. However, such partnerships have serious
constraints related to the depth, scalability, and sustainability of interventions. They remain largely underfunded to take
up context-specific in-depth work and therefore many a time land up simply reusing materials developed for other
contexts. Limitations related to funding also constrain their ability to work on downstream and at-scale roll-out. Further,
the funding made available to them is usually for a period of one or two years, which doesn’t provide a long-term runway
to plan, iterate, and revise interventions. Many a time, multiple agencies are working in the same space and this leads
to inefficient utilization of the in-service teacher training calendars. Finally, and most importantly, as these institutions
are not funded by the state, they can not always be viewed as fully accountable to the nodal educational institutions.
The lack of well-defined, formal contracts also results in (a) the government not having the intellectual property rights
to the resources and materials developed, or (b) not receiving the necessary support in the areas of transfer of technical
capacity. CHALK will mark a departure from this landscape. Nodal educational institutions will plan the terms of
reference for the long-term engagement of relevant technical support agencies. There will be a focus on the transfer of
capacity and/or joint development of resources. The intellectual property rights for resources developed will rest with
the state, and payments to selected technical agencies will only be made on completion of key deliverables.

5.
It is helpful that the activities and reforms envisioned under the CHALK operation are being planned against
a clear and stable policy backdrop. Underlying priorities and activities under each Program results area align with the
priorities under the NEP 2020. This center and state alignment are expected to translate into clear agreements for
expenditures to be prioritized under SS which will provide a part of the counterpart financing for the CHALK operation.

NEP Recommendation
Alignment with CHALK
Foundational
Learning
(Covered Under
Results Area 1)
The new pedagogical structure recommends moving
to a 5 + 3 + 3 + 4 system where the first five years
should be a cohesive foundational learning continuum
comprising three years of preschool education (Ages 3
to 6) and two years of primary school education (Age
6 to 8), and the next three years should be considered
a preparatory stage
CHALK will support the development and roll-out of a
short-term, multi-year, in-service course that will help
primary school teacher support (a) ECE at the colocated Anganwadis, (b) provide a school readiness
initiative to children who join school without receiving
any ECE, and (c) manage primary education under an
approach of TaRL.
Teachers’
Continuous
Professional
Development
“Each teacher will be expected to participate in at
least 50 hours of CPD opportunities every year for
their professional development, driven by their
interests.”
The use of technology platforms such as DIKSHA for
online training of teachers will be encouraged so that
standardized training initiatives can be administered
to large numbers of teachers within a short period.
The Program will support the development of inservice training modules which are need-based and
rooted in the state context. These courses will be
delivered on the needs diagnosed through SLAS, a
sample survey of teachers’ pedagogical practices, etc.
Teachers will have the flexibility to design their
learning trajectories. ICT-enabled platforms will be
leveraged to create a blended learning ecosystem.
Assessment
Reform
A progress card to be shared with parents that will be
a holistic, 360-degree, multidimensional report

“AI-based software could be developed and used by
students to help track their growth through their
school years based on learning data and interactive
Based on centrally designed formative and summative
assessments, the Program will support the creation
and sharing of holistic student report cards that
provide competency-oriented data on a student’s
progress across cognitive and non-cognitive areas.
These assessments will be digitally enabled to

Chhattisgarh: Accelerated Learning for a Knowledge-Economy (P179249)

questionnaires.”
facilitate faster data collection, analysis, and provision
of student-specific remedial resources for teachers.
Institutionalizing
School
Complexes
“Establishment of a grouping structure called the
school complex, consisting of one senior secondary
school together with all other schools offering lower
grades in its neighborhood including Anganwadis, in a
radius of five to ten kilometers.”
Parents and other key local stakeholders will be more
involved in the governance of schools/school
complexes, including as members of the SMCs
CHALK will support the development of 600 composite
schools with essential facilities and adequate subject
teachers. These schools will be the hub in the hub and
spoke setup advocated for school complex operation
under the NEP 2020.
CHALK will support the development of a school social
audit tool that the community would use to monitor
and provide periodic feedback on school performance.
School
Leadership and
Governance
“School Principals and school complex leaders to have
modular leadership/management workshops and
online development opportunities and platforms to
continuously
improve
their
leadership
and
management skills”
CHALK will invest in the training of decentralized
education functionaries and school leaders on better
school management practices including fiduciary
aspects, DRM, and SRGBV
Education
Management
Information
System (EMIS)
The fundamental principles that will guide the
education system will be the extensive use of
technology in educational planning and management
To structurally bring together and efficiently manage
all the interventions undertaken by the state, CHALK
will support the development of the state’s EMIS. The
EMIS will help in capturing, collating, analyzing, and
reporting data to track and measure progress.

6.
The CHALK operation also maintains a clear focus on accelerating the system’s recovery from the learning
losses caused by the prolonged school closures due to the COVID-19 pandemic. Activities under each result area of the
Program align with the World Bank’s suggested RAPID framework for accelerated recovery.

REACH every child
and retain them in
school
● The larger program of GoCG finances provisions of free textbooks, uniforms, cycles, child insurance, and
scholarships to minimize student dropouts
● CHALK will support the development of the state’s EMIS for facilitating student tracking and student
lifecycle management. This will help the state with the early identification of school dropouts
● Strengthening the system of school-based formative and summative assessments and associated studentspecific remedial support will help in reducing dropouts due to poor academic progress
ASSESS learning
levels regularly
● CHALK will provide support to the SAC in initiating a process of technically robust, periodic SLAS.
Communication of results and the emerging educational priorities among stakeholders will be prioritized
● ICT-enabled school-based formative and summative assessments to inform student-specific remedial
support will be a core area of work under CHALK
PRIORITISE teaching
the fundamental
● Teaching of fundamental competencies (literacy, numeracy, and socio-emotional skills) will be prioritized
in the primary grades. This will be a focus for the transition to TaRL
● Introduction of ‘play-based learning’ in-classroom and increase parental engagement to improve student
readiness in the foundational years will be a focus of support to primary school teachers
INCREASE Catch-up
learning and
progress beyond
what was lost
● CHALK will support initiatives for TaRL and ‘catch-up learning’ via structured pedagogy, targeted
instruction, remedial education support, and self-guided learning for academically weak students
● Aligned with the NCF 2022 (that has reduced the overall curriculum), and results from the SLAS, the lesson
plans for teachers will prioritize bridge education in the initial months of an academic year
DEVELOP
Psychological health
and well-being so
every child is ready
to learn
● The state has declared every Saturday as a bagless day. Under the larger program of the GoCG, the state
is investing in activities that can facilitate greater collaboration between students through hobby clubs,
sports activities, student council meetings, etc.

Chhattisgarh: Accelerated Learning for a Knowledge-Economy (P179249)

ANNEX 4. (SUMMARY) FIDUCIARY SYSTEMS ASSESSMENT

1.
The fiduciary risks are considered ‘Substantial’. The years of school education programs (SSA, RMSA & TE) have
resulted in the constant strengthening of systems and procedures. However, considering the multiplicity of
spending/executing agencies (states, Districts, and Sub-district levels) and diverse capacity across these agencies,
implementation challenges are expected. The main challenges lie in further strengthening PFM arrangements to make
them more efficient and improving compliance with rules and regulations thereby strengthening accountability. The
scope of the IFSA is limited to the boundary of the CHALK Program (The Program) and not the associated IPF component.
The total cost of the Program is estimated at US$535.9 million, of which the IBRD Financing is US$300 million. Here,
US$277.5 million will be disbursed under PforR, and US$21.75 will be disbursed under the IPF component.

2.
Institutional Framework for Program Implementation: The Program is carved out of GoCG’s SS program for
focused attention on certain key areas as described through the PDO.  The salient features of CHALK are: (a) the Program
uses the GoCG’s fiduciary systems, and the Program seeks to strengthen some of these systems, and (b) the value of
expenditure and the number of contracts under the Program are relatively small when compared to the scale of the
GoCG’s program and the scale of the other participating departments. Institutional arrangements for the Program
activities will follow the existing schema for implementing the SS scheme and is reliant on the use of country systems.

3.
Fiduciary arrangements for SS are laid out in the Manual for FMP for SIS-SS. CHALK will follow the principles
laid out in the manual for details of fiduciary procedures and controls. In addition, GoCG’s own systems (such as the use
of GFRs, budget manuals, procurement rules, treasury codes, the delegation of financial powers, and staffing) and “Store
Purchase Rules, 2002” and subordinate amendments/GOs will also influence the Program systems.

4.
Overall Planning and Budgeting: The framework for planning and budgeting under SS is well established, with
prescriptions documented within the overarching mandate enshrined in the scheme’s FMP manual. However, multiple
tiers of planning and implementation and capacity gaps pertaining to the preparation and management of budgets often
result in inadequately planned budgets and consequent delays in fund releases and low budget execution rates. Hence,
from a larger PFM perspective and a larger institutional strengthening focus, the GoCG’s school education planning and
budgeting will immensely benefit from a systemic review with focus on facilitating decentralized planning. Key
performance features are:
•
On an annual basis, the state submits an AWP&B proposal for approval by DoSE&L, MoE, and PAB. All Planning
data is collected from the UDISE. The state plan (consolidating the district plans) is finalized in January.
•
Timeline: Budget estimates get prepared and approved in the state before the start of the FY. However, the AWP&B
gets approved only by the third to the fifth month of the financial year. Hence, at the state-level a budget provision
is made for state and central share on estimates based on the expenditure of the previous FY.
•
Budget Reliability: At the overall state school education budget level, the budget outruns are within the acceptable
range of above 90 percent. However, at the SS level, the GoCG’s numbers reflect relatively lower outturns and are
suggestive of large savings in budget allocations and significant adjustments through revised budgets. The
divergence between approved AWP&B, MoE/ state budgets, releases, and the actual expenditure has been a
recurrent theme.  Even though annual and mid-term plans are developed for sub-district levels, AWP&B focuses
on program norms with a limited focus on priorities emerging from mid-term program planning.
•
Budget transparency: The annual budgets of the GoI and the states are public documents and are accessible on
GoI25/PS government websites. Additionally, AWP&B is available on the SS central website26. At the GoCG level, the

25 www.indiabudget.gov.in
26 http://seshagun.gov.in/pab-minutes

Chhattisgarh: Accelerated Learning for a Knowledge-Economy (P179249)

state makes public the annual budget allocations and utilizations details of the state Budget on adoption by the
state legislature. The annual budget speech details the budget strategies with due emphasis on the state’s
development focus and fiscal position. While initiatives have been taken toward budget transparency, the GoCG is
yet to adopt a formal framework or policy for the same.
•
Funding predictability is high, and risks to the Program Expenditure Framework arising out of budget constraints
are considered as low. The Program cost constitutes a relatively small portion of the overall SS, and GoCG budget
and is well aligned with the state’s vision. Overall funding to SS at the GoCG level shows a recovery in growth over
the past three financial years, with an increase from INR 1,966 Crore (US$246 million) in FY20/21 to INR 2,027 Crore
(US$253 million) in FY22/23, with a matching increase in budgeted commitment at the state level. This is equivalent
to an annual increase of over 1.5% percent over the three years considered with the base year being exposed to
COVID-19. Erstwhile, overall funding to SS stood at INR 2,473 Crore (US$309 million) in FY 2019/20 (pre-COVID-19
year). This growth is very likely to continue in the years to come.
•
Procurement Planning: All departments prepare budgets for each financial year, albeit without a procurement plan,
and the procurement process is initiated after the budget is approved and after obtaining administrative and
technical sanctions from the competent authorities/ tender committees as per the Delegation of Financial Powers
(DoFP). The FMP Manual of SS (refer to para 7.15) requires procuring agencies to prepare annual procurement
plans within one month of the approval of AWP&B to facilitate proper monitoring and timely execution of
procurement activities in the program. However, the assessment found that there is no practice of preparing an
annual procurement plan27 with timelines or of public disclosure of the same on an official website.

5.
Applicable Procurement Framework: The GoCG has no specific Procurement Law/Act. The Chhattisgarh
Government Store Purchase Rules, 2002 and subordinate GOs are the policy documents for Procurement Framework in
the state. The GoCG has issued two important amendments to these rules vide GOs dated Feb 28 and May 9, 2022,
revising the procurement rules28. These rules and their amendments do not provide any specific guidelines or
instructions for the selection of consultancy services. For procurement of works, the PWD Codes and Work Manuals are
followed. The DoFP defines various thresholds/limits for sanctioning the estimates and according to administrative and
technical sanctions/approvals for procurement contracts based on the hierarchy in the department.

6.
Available Procurement Methods: Open tender is the preferred mode of procurement and shall be used for all
procurement with an estimated contract value above INR 300,000. Below this threshold, other methods such as (i)
tender method (below value INR 50,000) for propriety items, and (ii) Limited tender method (INR 50,000 to INR 300,000)
are permissible. Single stage two envelope method is the most widely used method for procurement of goods and
works. Under the open tendering method, (i) for an estimated value of INR 3,00,001 to INR 500,000, the tender notice
(NIT) is to be published in a widely publicized local newspaper, (ii) for an estimated value of INR 500,001 to INR
1,000,000, NIT is to be published in two state-level newspapers of wide circulation, (iii) for an estimated value of INR
1,000,001 to INR 2,000,000, NIT is to be published in two state-level newspapers and one national level newspaper of
wide circulation, and (iv) for an estimated value above INR 2,000,001, it is to be published in a state-level newspaper
and two national-level newspapers of wide circulation. Moreover, GoCG also mandates the publication of NITs on the
e-Government Procurement (e-GP) platform of GoCG and the procuring entientity’s website. The bidding period allowed
for submission of bids/proposals from the date of publication of NIT is as per the below table:
Publication of NIT/ Value Thresholds
Number of Days
1st Call
2nd Call
3rd Call
Limited Tender

27 Annual procurement plans include contract packaging; method and timing of contract awards considering weather conditions which allows for a limited
construction window during the year and planned contract completion period based on pragmatic approach.
28 https://emanec.cg.gov.in/circulars

Chhattisgarh: Accelerated Learning for a Knowledge-Economy (P179249)

Open tendering method
(i) Between INR 3,00,001 to INR 1,000,000
(ii) Above INR 1,000,000
Global Tender (ICB method)

7.
Procurement Exclusions: The Program is not expected to procure any high-value contracts29 valued at or above
OPRC thresholds (US$75 million for works, US$50 million for goods and non-consulting services, and US$20 million for
consultant services). During Program Implementation, continued compliance regarding the exclusion of high-value
contract(s) would be monitored by way of Program audits and during missions.

8.
Standard Procurement Documents: There is no universal suite of Procurement documents/templates for goods,
works, and services. The bid documents are customized by the IAs as per the requirement.  The Fraud and Corruption
clauses are not made part of the contract agreement. Thus, the same should be included in the contract agreements.

9.
Use of e-Government Procurement Platform: The GO dated May 9, 2022 (amendment to Store Purchase Rules,
2002) stipulates the use of the e-GP platform of GoCG https://eproc.cgstate.gov.in/. Currently, this platform is used for
all procurements with an estimated value of INR 3 Lakhs (US$3,750 equivalent) and above for procurement of goods
and consultancy and non-consultancy services, and INR 20 Lakhs (US$25,000 equivalent) and above for works contracts.
Use of Government e-Marketplace (GeM):  GoCG has mandated the procuring entities of the state to use the emarketing network portal of CSIDC, GoCG (https://emanec.cg.gov.in) for procurement of commonly available and
standard goods and services. This arrangement is similar to the GoI e-Marketplace GeM portal (https://gem.gov.in/).
The procuring entities are instructed vide GO date May 9, 2022, to use this portal for procurement of standard goods
and services, and in case found to be unavailable on this portal, the same can be procured through GeM portal.

10.
Preference Policy: As per GO dated May 9, 2022 (para 4.7 B), certain preferences are allowed to specified
categories of bidders such as Micro, Small and Medieum Enterprises (MSME) registered with Industry Department and
valid startups recognized by GoI established in the state. Exemption for payment of Earnest Money Deposit to such
MSMEs and start-ups is permissible while participating in the procurement process undertaken by the GoCG.

11.
Contract Management: In general, contract management is carried out as per the conditions of the contract.
For the centralized procurement, contracts are managed and monitored by SIS-SS, and payments are made after
satisfactory delivery and installation of required goods at the site and on obtaining delivery challan and confirmation
from the respective field offices. For works contracts, the contract execution is done at a decentralized level by the
concerned Executive Engineer. The day-to-day contract monitoring and supervision is carried concerned Assistant
Engineer and Junior Engineer. PWD and RES have quality control mechanisms in place to carry out periodical checks of
various construction activities. An online Contract Monitoring System known as eWorks System is in place for day-today monitoring of the physical and financial progress of the contracts. Disclosure of Contract Award: The contract award
notices are not published/disclosed in the eGP Platform or on the department website. The same should be disclosed
on the procuring entity’s website.

18. Funds Flow, Accounting, and Financial Reporting Performance within System Framework: Funds flow under SS
follows the PFMS-linked SNA model up till the last point of payment. No direct cash transfers/ payments occur under
the SS program. All payments under the program are made through electronic mode and are mapped through the PFMS.
Only a few pretty cash transactions, only at remote locations got highlighted as part of the IFSA. The same is also on a

29 High Value means contracts with estimated values exceeding the monetary amounts that require mandatory review by the Bank’s operations Procurement Review
Committee (OPRC)

Chhattisgarh: Accelerated Learning for a Knowledge-Economy (P179249)

reducing trend after the roll-out of SNA. While the SNA model has substantially enhanced cash management under the
program, multiple implementation challenges have also emerged.  Some of the key challenges are: (a) lack of effective
information interface between the PFMS system and the Banking network, hence not only requiring duplication of
efforts but also resulting in errors at each level; (ii) increased reliance on the banking network has become a bottleneck
due to limited knowledge and efforts at the banking end; (iii) the radical change in handling the funds and increased
reliance on systems also requires changes in the accounting practices at each level. It is important to note that the SS
accounts are prepared broadly on time but with continuing independent review observations. The SIS-SS Accounting
and SNA framework and functioning are considered adequate for associated functions under CHALK Program.

12.
The Program activities will be pre-financed by the GoCG’s budget and the Bank funds will be disbursed based
on the achievement of DLRs. The Program budget allocation and fund flow system will follow a dual approach, and
thereby ensure adequate fund availability for the Program activities. First, under the SNA for SS: The existing AWP&B
heads forming part of the SS program and presently funded through the SS SNA account will receive allocations, based
on work plans and activities approved by SIS-SS, CoCG. The incremental allocations based on the scaling up of activities
on account of CHALK result agreements under these existing heads shall be duly provided based on work plans and
activities approved. Secondly, under the SNA for CHALK Program: IBRD funds will flow under a separate budget line
earmarking Externally Aided/ CHALK Program funding at DoSE, GoCG through the state treasury route and shall then be
released in tranches into the Chalk SNA account opened at SIS-SS specifically for the CHALK Program. The funds from
CHALK-SNA shall be devolved to the implementing agencies through the following approach: (i) SIS-SS will directly access
funds through CHALK-SNA at the state level and shall further open district and/ or sub-district level zero balance child
accounts, if so required, under the approved annual CHALK AWP&B, and (ii) The PWD and RES will access funds through
zero balance, child bank accounts linked to CHALK – SNA and all payments related to budget heads falling under CHALK
Program Expenditure Framework shall be processed through these accounts.

13.
CHALK Program accounting will be on a cash basis with accounts maintained electronically. Expenditure will
be recorded and reported at the time of final payment for works, goods, services, and other expenditures. Accounting
will be guided by the SS FMP Manual. A separate entity in Tally will be opened to do accounting for expenditures incurred
through the CHALK SNA account. PWD and RES have well-operational online contract management systems, well
integrated with the GoCG Integrated Financial Management Information System with monthly reporting to state
Accounting. The CHALK Program-related contracts shall be separately accounted for and monitored in the respective
contract management system with monthly reporting to SIS-SS. In addition, PWD and RES will roll out the Tally module
to maintain accounts for expenditures incurred through CHALK SNA linked zero balance child bank account. Further,
PWD and RES will send monthly accounts to SIS-SS for overall monitoring. All the Program units will follow Samagra
Shiksha-SNA and CHALK-SNA channels for incurring expenditure along the Program expenditure framework.

14.
Financial and Procurement Management, Staffing, and Capacity Building: The SIS-SS fiducairy staffing follows
SS FMP manual norms. On average, SIS-SS is functioning at approximately 70 percent of the sanctioned strength. The
existing Fiduciary staff strength needs to be augmented to support the fiduciary aspects of the Program. Under the
Program, a PMC will be engaged to support SIS-SS in the day-to-day functioning. It is agreed an FM and a Procurement
specialist shall be engaged as part of this PMC. Further, the arrangement of functional responsibilities of existing finance
and accounts staff for supporting SS needs to be established for supporting the CHALK Program. Further, FM training is
limited to addressing issue-based approaches. Hence, it is essential that need-based, thematic area-wise training
should be conducted. Further, given that there is constant change in financial management personnel it is suggested
that GoCG should take the initiative of developing an FM Orientation and Training Module for providing concurrent
need-based training. It is suggested to be a multi-tier capacity-building initiative giving due consideration to the
respective roles, responsibilities, and related FM duties: (i) SIS-SS FM team and state Finance Controllers; (ii)

Chhattisgarh: Accelerated Learning for a Knowledge-Economy (P179249)

state/district/sub-district accounting staff; (iii) SMCs; and (iv) SNA bank (including sub-district branches). This module
shall be rolled out in addition to the physical training on thematic areas.

15.
Internal Controls: The SIS-SS internal control framework is well defined and laid out in the FMP Manual for SS.
However, deviations are observed in the implementation of the laid-out controls like inadequate control over advances;
long-standing capital work in progress; inadequate expenditure supporting documents; etc. Not only does the
statutory/independent audit review continue to highlight systemic issues, but there also remains a general lack of
adequate focused review by way of an internal audit system. The IFSA reflects that SIS-SS needs to augment its FM team
to strengthen the application of internal controls across the Program implementation. There is a need to (i) establish a
state office level, internal control monitoring cell; (ii) strengthen the internal audit function; and (iii) establish audit
observations review and addressable mechanism on the lines of establishing an Audit Committee.

16.
Internal Audit: For SS, GoCG Internal Audit has been initiated recently, from FY 2021-22, is in the initial phase
of implementation, and can benefit from enhancements. SIS-SS follows an outsourced approach to internal audit and
has hired the services of qualified Chartered Accountant firms to conduct an internal audit on lines of the suggestive
Terms of Reference (ToR) as provided in the SS FMP manual. On review of the reports, it is observed that the function
can be made more effective by (a) strengthening the ToR in line with good industry practices, such as deepening the
scope/coverage through a risk-based, thematic area-focused audit approach, specialized review in the functional areas
of asset procurement; stock audits, etc. and (b) by establishing an effective compliance and follow-up mechanism.
Program arrangements: Program arrangements will include the annual internal audit of SIS-SS with an additional report
on functions under CHALK, specifically flowing out of the CHALK SNA account, including the Program activities carried
out by PWD and RES. The internal audit ToR shall be expanded in consultation with the Bank.

17.
External Audit and Oversight: The audit of Samagra Shiksha is conducted annually by a firm of Chartered
Accountants and reports are generally issued in the month of December/January each year. The audit is conducted as
per the ToR and scope of work provided in the annexure of the FMP Manual, covering state project office, district and
sub-district units, SCERT, DIETs, etc., and the auditors are rotated once every three years. The audit for the financial year
2021-2022 stands completed and the report shared with the GoI. On review of the statutory observations for the past
few years, it is observed that many of the observations highlighted are getting gathered over some time due to
inadequate resolution. It may be noted that there exist unresolved/ addressed statutory observations since FY 2009-10.
To ensure the precision of accounting information flowing out of the converged accounts, the statutory audit
observations highlighted in the past under the individual schemes must be adequately addressed/resolved. In addition,
moving forward, for strengthened FM arrangements it is imperative to establish audit observations review and
resolution mechanisms along the lines of establishing an audit committee. Program arrangements: For the CHALK
Program, the annual audit report of the SIS-SS will cover all payments/expenditures through the CHALK SNA account
including the transaction by PWD and RES, and shall also include a separate schedule for reporting the expenditure
against the AWP&B heads forming part of the CHALK Program Expenditure Framework. The report will be submitted to
the Bank within nine months of the close of the Financial Year i.e. by December 31st.

18.
Procurement Complaint Handling Mechanism: All complaints are either received through the Public Grievances
Redressal Portal of CoCG or by email/post. Complaints are addressed following the administrative procedure prescribed
by the GoCG. The bidder if not satisfied may approach the Court of Law for seeking redress. Currently, there is no
dedicated mechanism in place to treat procurement-related complaints promptly. To address this critical gap, a
comprehensive online complaint redressal system should be developed with clearly defined protocols, timelines, and
authorities to redress the complaints and their disclosure on the website. Debarment Process: The Rules for Registration
for Contractors of the GoCG prescribe the rules of registration, suspension, blacklisting, and restoration of contractors.

Chhattisgarh: Accelerated Learning for a Knowledge-Economy (P179249)

ANNEX 5. SUMMARY ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SYSTEMS ASSESSMENT

1.
Environmental and Social Systems Assessment (ESSA): ESSA for the Program has been completed in accordance
with PforR Guidance. It involved review of relevant E&S management systems for the SS in Chhattisgarh, consultations
with key staffs at SS-SIS, district, and block level DoSE staffs, school Principals and teachers, field visits to schools, and
consultations with key stakeholders. And involved a comprehensive review of relevant government (central and state)
policies, legal frameworks, Program documents, and national & state guidelines for SS, and was complemented by
consultations with SS-SIS, PWD, RES, and the Department of Tribal and Scheduled Caste (DoTSC) to capture opinions,
anecdotal evidence, functional knowledge, and concerns in managing E&S risks/impacts. Consultations were held with
NGOs/ civil society, community members, hostel superintendents, members of PRIs, and SMCs/ SDMCs in select districts.

2.
E&S Risks/Impacts: For an overview of E&S risks/impacts, kindly refer to paragraph 70 of the main text.

3.
No land acquisition and/or land restriction is anticipated under the Program, and where required GoCG’s land
will be used. The proposed infrastructure works will use land and building within its existing school campus for repair,
refurbishments, upgradation and extension. The overall E&S risk is rated as ‘moderate’, given the E&S effects of the
Program is localized, reversible, predictable, and mitigable by complying with existing E&S regulations and guidelines,
and by strengthening the existing E&S management systems, for which ESSA has made specific recommendations.

4.
School construction activities may generate issues such as: (i) uncontrolled construction may affect natural
resources; unplanned dumping of construction waste may clog natural water channels and result in soil degradation;
untreated/poorly treated sewage may pollute surface water sources; uncontrolled groundwater extraction may reduce
water availability; (ii) weak institutional capacity for E&S would result in non-segregation and non-utilization of biodegradable waste, mismanagement of solid waste and dumping on the school campus; (iii) lack of understanding of local
geology while sourcing groundwater may result in the use of non-potable water; (iv) poorly maintained water treatment
facilities; (v) Ad-hoc use of standard designs without understating the climatic conditions and not following green building
guidelines could result in poorly designed classrooms that lack sufficient light and ventilation. Paving the entire campus
would result in a reduction in groundwater recharging and adding to the heat island effect; (v) Absence of guidelines on
tree plantation results in non-native, invasive flora; (vi) lack of safety guidelines may result in OHS concerns for the labors.

5.
The following activities are excluded from Program financing: Activities causing high or substantial E&S risks/
impacts are not financed under the Program, these include: (i) any land acquisition, physical relocation and/or involuntary
resettlement impacts; (ii) activities that are non-compliant with Central and state environmental legislation; (iii) use of
child/bonded/forced labor or labor involved in hazardous activities; (iv) destruction or damage to physical and cultural
resources; (v) Convert or encroach forests, notified wetlands or eco-sensitive areas, and/or construction within all
protected/forest areas (National Parks, Wildlife Sanctuaries and Corridors) and, within Eco-Sensitive Zones for which final
or draft notifications have been published by the MoEFCC, GoI; (vi) any conversion of common property resources,
including grazing lands; (vii) construction or demolition within 100-meter radius of protected monuments identified by
the Archaeological Survey of India or Chhattisgarh state Archaeology Department; (viii) construction, renovation or
dismantling works involving ‘asbestos containing material’; and (ix) use or generation of hazardous materials or chemicals
beyond permissible levels, as specified in Schedule II of the Hazardous Waste Handling and Management Rules of 2016.

6.
Assessment of borrower’s capacity and systems: Capacities and systems at SIS-SS, PWD, and RES were assessed.
The most relevant ESSA core principles for the Program are to promote E&S sustainability in the Program design, public
and workers’ safety, and the rights and interests of STs. The assessment benefited from the experience of implementing
Environmental Management Frameworks (EMFs) developed under the SSA (primary school) and RMSA (secondary

Chhattisgarh: Accelerated Learning for a Knowledge-Economy (P179249)

school) programs of the MHRD (now MoE), both supported by the Bank. These EMFs, included key environmental, H&S
actions, have been adopted under the Samagra Shiksha Framework (SSF) and remain relevant.  The SSF requires school
buildings/infrastructure to be environment-friendly and provide a clean, hygienic, and safe learning environment.

7.
The SS guidelines provide the institutional mechanism for school education program implementation and
detailed roles and responsibilities to be followed in the state. It follows the process of consultations with various
stakeholders and aims to create transparency and accountability in the program implementation at the school level
through the participation of community members and other stakeholders in SMC. The SS-SIS identifies children of SC, ST,
minorities, low-income households, and CwSN, and aims to provide educational opportunities in an inclusive
environment, free from discrimination. RTE (2009) further addresses gender and social equity within a framework that is
holistic and systemic.  However, the implementation at the state level requires strengthening in the area of infrastructure
design measures in line and spirit with SSF and addressing universal access, fire safety, norms for minimum space for
classrooms and hostels, and mechanisms for the upkeep of facilities and equipment, along with strengthening community
and stakeholder participation and building institutional capacity for transparency and accountability.

8.
Chhattisgarh has about a third of the population being ST with 13 districts fully and 6 districts partially notified
under the Scheduled V areas, some of which are sparsely populated forested areas. Also, some of these districts are
affected by Left-Wing Extremism (LWE), however, over the past few years LWE areas have been shrinking, and there have
been more community demands for education facilities. Many sparsely populated tribal areas, requires bringing students
to a more central place for secondary education, and hence, requires hostel facilities, which are also the preferred mode
by the local community.  While the state already has several hostel facilities for girls and boys and are being managed by
the DoTSC, it is important to undertake the need assessment considering existing infrastructure and geographic situations
towards addressing equity and inclusion and for enhanced learning outcomes and incorporate them into planning.

9.
The PWD has the capacity to undertake the school construction work, as they have experience in constructing
and maintaining schools in Chhattisgarh. They have their structural design and electric and mechanical teams, labs to test
water portability, and the ability to connect with other agencies, as needed, to meet any specific needs required by the
individual clients. The RES department has a presence in each district and works together with the district collectors.
They have the capacity for all kinds of repair, maintenance, and small construction and upgradation work. Most model
composite schools to date have been built under the supervision of RES. Both departments, PWD and RES, would need
capacity building in establishing a protocol to convey the requirements to the design and construction process; ensuring
timely inputs of other departments viz. Public Health Engineering, Horticulture, Ground Water Board, etc. in the design
process; defining scope towards green building principles; establishing in-house E&S expertise; and preparing templates
and procedures to include environmental, social, health, and safety aspects in the supervision and monitoring.

Chhattisgarh: Accelerated Learning for a Knowledge-Economy (P179249)

 .

ANNEX 6. PROGRAM ACTION PLAN

Action
Description
Source
DLI#
Responsibility
Timing
Completion Measurement
Grade and subject
wise, competency
based learning
standards defined
Technical
DoSE, GoCG
Due Date
29-DecOfficial document
published/notified by the DoSE,
GoCG
State EMIS
developed and
operationalized
Technical
DoSE, GoCG
Due Date
30-Jun-2025 MIS made accessible to IVA for
verification
Composite schools
design to integrate
requirements on
green, inclusion,
resilience and
safety
Environmental
and Social
Systems
DoSE/SS-SIS
Due Date
28-Jun-2024 (i) School designs incorporate
green, inclusion, resilience, and
safety aspects; and (ii)
Notification for incorporating
the same in all civil works under
the program.
Create protocol/
mechanisms to
coordinate with
Public Health,
Ground water, and
Forest/Horticulture
department
Environmental
and Social
Systems
DoSE/SS-SIS
Due Date
28-Jun-2024 Coordination protocol is
established, and guidelines are
issued for receiving inputs on
water availability, quality, and
greening / plantation
Training for School
Heads, SMCs, Civil
Works Agencies &
Contractors on EHS
management
Environmental
and Social
Systems
DoSE/SS-SIS
Recurrent
SemiAnnually
Preparation of training modules
for different target groups in
the school education systems
and rollout
Strengthen
contractual
obligations on EHS
management
Environmental
and Social
Systems
DoSE/SS-SIS
Due Date
28-Jun-2024 Inclusion of EHS obligations in
standard bidding documents
for construction contracts
Institute system for
developing SIP by
the SMCs prior to
DPR preparation
for civil works at
model composite
schools
Environmental
and Social
Systems
DoSE/SS-SIS
Due Date
28-Jun-2024 SIP template developed in line
with SSF and notified as
mandatory for initiating DPR
preparation for civil works at a
model composite school under
the Operation; and District
Education Officers trained on
SIP preparation.
Strengthening GRM
to register, screen,
redress, monitor, &
report grievances
periodically
Environmental
and Social
Systems
DoSE/SS-SIS
Due Date
28-Jun-2024 Strengthened GRM system
functional and periodic reports
being generated.

Chhattisgarh: Accelerated Learning for a Knowledge-Economy (P179249)

Strengthen the
internal audit
system and
compliance system.
Fiduciary
Systems
SIS-SS
Due Date
28-Jun-2024 Risk-based, thematic area
focused Internal Audit
approach adopted for SS
program, with a corresponding
well-defined roadmap for
compliance.
District and Block
level camps set up
to address
unresolved
statutory audit
observations since
FY 2009-10,
Fiduciary
Systems
SIS-SS
Due Date
27-Jun-2025 Observations closed and impact
on SS reported expenditures of
the respective years assessed
Statutory audit
compliance
mechanism
established
Fiduciary
Systems
SIS-SS
Due Date
28-Jun-2024 Audit Committee established
for review of audit
observations, defining
mechanisms for compliance,
and periodically reviewing
compliance
Ensure sufficient
State, District, and
Sub-District level
staffing for
financial
management and
procurement
Fiduciary
Systems
SIS-SS
Due Date
28-Jun-2024 State to re-assess FM and
Procurement staffing
requirements including vacancy
status and prepare a timebound plan for addressing the
same
Measure and
periodically report
on Key
Performance
Indicators (KPIs) for
procurement
Fiduciary
Systems
SIS-SS
Recurrent
SemiAnnually
Semi-annual report submitted
to the World Bank using a
mutually agreed format
Establish complaint
handling and
reporting system
for procurement
Fiduciary
Systems
SIS-SS
Due Date
29-DecOnline complaint handling
mechanism developed, and
operationalized on the website
of SIS-SS
Ensure application
of World Bank Anticorruption
guidelines
Fiduciary
Systems
SIS-SS
Recurrent
SemiAnnually
Semi-annual report submitted
to the World Bank using a
mutually agreed format
 .

Chhattisgarh: Accelerated Learning for a Knowledge-Economy (P179249)

ANNEX 7. IMPLEMENTATION SUPPORT PLAN

1.
During implementation, the World Bank team’s support will evolve from technical inputs towards activity
initiation to project management and need-based course correction, and conclude with a focus on ensuring the
sustainability of gains. In the first 12 months, the team will focus on helping the state in operationalizing the TEACH toolbased system of periodic classroom-based observation and coaching of teachers from the model composite schools; and
in utilizing the Lesson Plan and Guidebook Quality Assessment Tool that it has developed as part of the COACH package.

2.
The team will leverage two annual ISMs to review the implementation progress, identify issues that need to be
addressed, monitor changes in risks, check compliance with legal agreements, and assess the adequacy of fiduciary,
environmental, and social systems. The legal agreement (including the PAP and DLIs) and the Project Appraisal Document
will provide the basis for the bi-annual review. More importantly, at least one of these review missions will be field-based
and allow the team to hold more in-depth discussions with a diverse set of stakeholders. The skills needed and the staff
time required for these missions is summarized in the table below. Where necessary, the World Bank team and the GoCG
will invite technical experts to join these missions. This could include World Bank staff working on operations in other
states and countries. This will facilitate the exchange of ideas that can help the state overcome bottlenecks.

Skills Needed
Staff Weeks
Trips
Project Management (Task Team Leader and Co-TTL)
20 per annum
6 per annum
Assessment Systems Development (Team Member or Short-Term Consultant)
4 per annum
1 per annum
Foundational Learning (Team Member)
4 per annum
1 per annum
Teacher Professional Development (Team Member)
6 per annum
1 per annum
Financial Management (Team Member)
2 per annum
1 per annum
Procurement (Team Member)
2 per annum
1 per annum
Environmental Systems and Safeguards (Team Member)
2 per annum
1 per annum
Social Systems and Safeguards (Team Member)
2 per annum
1 per annum
Tribal Development Specialist (Team Member)
2 per annum
1 per annum

3.
The PMC engaged by the GoCG to assist with the concurrent monitoring and management of the operation will
prepare and share a quarterly progress review report with all implementation agencies. This report will be prepared
against the PAP, DLIs, and RF contained in the Project Appraisal Document. It will also be made available to the team from
the World Bank and will be used to prepare for the bi-annual ISMs. It will include any challenges being faced in the delivery
of key results and any initiatives or activities on which the implementing agencies would want the World Bank to support
with technical inputs by convening relevant experts (internal and/or external). It will also include Key Performance
Indicators (KPIs) to measure procurement and contract management performance (e.g., procurement timing,
participation, disclosure of contract award data, rate of a successful tender, cost over-run, time overrun, payment delay)
of the Program. The report will provide details on actions taken to address any observations and findings from the internal
and statutory audit. It will also carry the most up-to-date contact details that the World Bank can use to connect with the
state Vigilance Commission as part of any follow-up the Bank conducts concerning complaints reported or issues observed.

4.
Status of the flow of funds from the state treasury to the SIS-SS, expenditure by economic category (as specified
in the Program expenditure framework), and timely payment to service providers on delivery of service (IPF
Component) will be key areas for concurrent monitoring. The PMC engaged by the GoCG will prepare and submit
quarterly status reports on these aspects. This will help ensure early identification, discussion, and escalation of
bottlenecks, to the state FD or the office of the Chief Secretary, GoCG.

Chhattisgarh: Accelerated Learning for a Knowledge-Economy (P179249)

ANNEX 8. INVESTMENT PROJECT FINANCING COMPONENT

1.
The IPF component will support the state's nodal educational institutions through the need-based engagement of
technical experts and service providers. It will also support EMIS development, the engagement of a PMC, and an IVA.
S No.
Description
Value
Type
Hiring of an agency to support SCERT with teacher training
US$7,000,000
Consulting Service
Hiring of a vendor for EMIs development
US$5,000,000
Consulting Service
Hiring of an agency to support SCERTwith rollout of TARL
US$4,000,000
Consulting Service
Hiring of an agency to support SIEMAT with training of head teachers
US$2,000,000
Consulting Service
Hiring of an agency to support SAC with learning assessments and remedial education
US$2,000,000
Consulting Service
Hiring of a PMC
US$1,500,000
Consulting Service
Hiring of an IVA
US$250,000
Consulting Service
Total
US$21,750,000

2.
FM for the IPF Component: The SIS-SS will be responsible for the fiduciary responsibilities for the IPF component;
these will include: (a) ensuring compliance with all financial covenants in the legal agreements; (b) budgeting, and overall
management of payments and accounting function; (c) furnishing interim financial reports and obtaining funds from the
IBRD loan; and (d) preparation of annual financial statements and managing the internal/external audit process. Key
aspects of the FM arrangements are: (i) The SIS-SS will project the required resources to be budgeted for the IPF
component on an annual basis; these projections will be included in the DoSE budget, which is then submitted to the FD
for incorporation into the state annual budget. A separate budget code (line item) will be set up in a manner that will allow
for all project-related expenditures to be identified, accounted for, and reported; (ii) The FM unit will be headed by the
Finance Controller of the SIS-SS who will be responsible for managing day-to-day FM activities. S/he shall be supported by
a qualified CA engaged by the SIS-SS as a part of the PMC it proposes to hire; (iii) All payments will be made by the state
treasury (i.e. the PFMS) and are expected to be made centrally i.e. to the separate bank account that the SIS-SS has set up
for CHALK. The state Financial Rules provide the required control framework for transaction control over individual items
of expenditure; (iv) The SIS-SS will submit semi-annual IUFRs to the World Bank within 45 days of the end of each semester;
based on which the loan will finance 100 percent of eligible expenditures, and incremental operating costs including taxes;
and (v) A CA firm will be the statutory auditor for the IPF component. The CA firm will conduct an annual audit of the
Project (as per a ToR agreed with the Bank) and the audit report (along with the audit of the PforR Program) will be
submitted to the World Bank within nine months of the close of each FY.

3.
Procurement for the IPF Component: All procurements under the IPF component will be conducted following the
Bank’s Procurement Regulations, July 2016 (Revised November 2020). The SIS-SS will be responsible for this. Procurement
risks related to the IPF component include the inexperience of the SIS-SS to process consultancy services following World
Bank Procurement Regulations which may lead to delays in procurement. Procurement risks will be mitigated by: (i) using
procurement skilled officials; (ii) prior- and post-procurement reviews by the Bank; (iii) providing extensive training and
handholding support to the SIS-SS staff; (iv) using the World Bank’s Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement
(STEP) system to manage and track the timeliness of the procurement activities; (v) following the Bank’s Standard
Procurement Documents; and (vi) using electronic procurement portal of GoCG for all procurements. For the project the
SIS-SS will prepare a simplified PPSD. The PPSD will spell out the detailed procurement arrangements (e.g., procurement
packaging strategy, method, bid evaluation methodology of the major packages, the timeline for the procurement
activities, and contracting arrangement) including the risk mitigation measures. PPSD will be a live document and will be
updated at least annually. As an output of the PPSD exercise, Procurement Plan for the IPF component has been developed
by the SIS-SS and accepted by the World Bank. The procurement plan contains the procurement activities to be financed,
the selection methods for procurement, market approach, contracting arrangement, estimated costs, the World Bank’s
prior review requirements, a timeline of the procurement activities, and other conditions related to procurement.

Chhattisgarh: Accelerated Learning for a Knowledge-Economy (P179249)

4.
The E&S risk for this component is assessed to be low. Activities under the IPF component are not expected to
have any adverse E&S risks or impacts. It does not support any civil works.  The relevant Environment and Social Standards
(ESSs) for this TA are ESS 1: Assessment and Management of E&S Risks and Impacts, ESS 2: Labor and Working Conditions,
ESS 3: Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management, and ESS10: Stakeholder Engagement and
Information Disclosure. Given the limited nature of the activities an ESCP integrating the LMP, and SEP actions were
created, to monitor the E&S risks, with timeframes. No other E&S instruments were viewed as needed to manage the risks
& impacts of this component.  The E&S Cell at SIS-SS, with support from the PMC being engaged, will support, supervise
and monitor E&S management for activities supported by the IPF component.

5.
ESS10 Stakeholder Engagement and Information Disclosure: The stakeholders of the TA activities will encompass
a broad range of institutional actors such as SCERT, SIEMAT, SS-SIS, and other sub-sections of the DoSE including district,
block and cluster level officials and the school principals and teachers. The IPF-TA component will follow the existing
mechanism under the SSF for consultation with stakeholders. The modes and frequency of engagement will be determined
by the needs of the Program. Program information will be made available to stakeholders through DoSE websites and
other means of communication following established mechanisms of sharing information and seeking feedback.

6.
ESS2 Labor and Working Conditions: Apart from the direct workers of DoSE, SS-SIS, SCERT, SIEMAT, and the other
sections of DoSE, who follow the established GoCG norms of employment, the IPF component will have contracted
workers engaged in consulting firms to be hired for supporting the Program. With respect to these workers, provisions of
ESS-2 relating to terms and conditions of employment, non-discrimination and equal opportunity, worker’s organizations,
provisions on working conditions, management of workers relationships, OHS (including personal protective equipment,
and emergency preparedness/response), code of conduct (including relating to SEA/SH), forced labor, child labor, GRM
will apply. Given the level of risk, the provisions to address the ESS2 requirements are integrated into the ESCP.

7.
ESS3: Resource Efficiency and Pollution Prevention and Management: The development of the state's EMIS, if at
all, may generate some e-waste and solid waste (including plastics, and paper) in the nodal institutions. India has
guidelines for the disposal of E-waste under the E-Waste Management Rules, 2016 (amended in March 2018), and Solid
Waste Management Rules, 2016.  As the EMIS development will be supported by vendors, all involved parties—SIS, DoSE,
schools, and other entities must have systems in place to manage the waste efficiently by segregated storage, reuse/
recycling, and disposing-off in an environmentally appropriate manner at end-of-life through authorized agencies. ToRs
for the MIS work will include requirements for arranging the disposal of equipment in line with local and national
regulations and following good international industry practices for segregation, collection, transportation, reuse,
recycling, and disposal.  A Waste Management Plan is included in the ESSA of this Program, and any waste generated as
the result of EMIS development will have to be managed/disposed of as per the guidance provided in the ESSA.  A
commitment, under section 3 of the ESCP, has been included for the client to comply with in such circumstances.

8.
Key ESCP Measures Agreed with the Client: SIS and GoCG will (i) maintain through project implementation the
current organizational structure, within SIS, with qualified staff and resources assigned to support E&S tasks and
management of ESHS risks and impacts of the Project, including one individual who is well versed on E&S issues and able
to carry-out E&S due diligence, as needed, in accordance with the World Bank ESF standards; (ii) adopt and implement
throughout project implementation the LMP requirements in accordance of ESS2, including, provisions on working
conditions, management of workers relationships, OHS (including PPE, and emergency preparedness and response), code
of conduct (including relating to SEA and SH), forced labor, child labor, grievance arrangements for Project workers, as
well as, applicable requirements for contractors, subcontractors, and supervising firms; (iii) SIS will follow the waste
management guidance provided in the ESSA for this component, to manage any e-waste, solid waste, hazardous and nonhazardous wastes generated; and (iv) Adopt and implement SEP and GRM activities as detailed in the ESCP.
