===== SOURCE FILE: BOSIB-d8efcebf-ebaf-4a92-b398-ff854a89e457.pdf =====

Official Use Only

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Report No: PADHI01117

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION

PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
ON A
PROPOSED CREDIT

IN THE AMOUNT OF SDR72.8 MILLION
(US$100 MILLION EQUIVALENT)

AND

A GRANT
IN THE AMOUNT OF US$5 MILLION
FROM THE EARLY LEARNING PARTNERSHIP MULTI-DONOR TRUST FUND

TO THE

KINGDOM OF CAMBODIA

FOR A

CAMBODIA BASIC EDUCATION IMPROVEMENT PROJECT
(P508313)

AUGUST 7, 2025

Education
East Asia and Pacific Region

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their official
duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized

Official Use Only
CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
(Exchange Rate Effective June 30, 2025)

Currency Unit =
Special Drawing Rights (SDR);
Cambodian Riels (KHR)

US$1= SDR 0.7278
US$1= KHR 4,008.50

FISCAL YEAR
January 1 - December 31

Regional Vice President: Manuela V. Ferro
Regional Practice Director: Alberto Rodriguez
Division Director: Mariam J. Sherman
Practice Manager: Mario Cristian Aedo Inostroza
Task Team Leaders: Fata No, Lars M. Sondergaard, Tsuyoshi Fukao

Official Use Only
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

AM
Accountability Mechanism
AWPB
Annual Work Plan and Budget
BEIP
Basic Education Improvement Project
CDPF
Capacity Development Partnership Fund
CERC
Contingent Emergency Response Component
CPD
Continuous Professional Development
DA
Designated Account
DOE
District Office of Education
DP
Development Partner
ECE
Early Childhood Education
ECED
Early Childhood Education Department
EdTech
Educational Technology
EGL
Early Grade Learning
EGM
Early Grade Math
EGR
Early Grade Reading
ELP
Early Learning Partnership
EQID
Education Quality Inspection Department
ERM
Emergency Response Manual
ESCP
Environmental and Social Commitment Plan
ESF
Environmental and Social Framework
ESMF
Environmental and Social Management Framework
ESU
Environmental and Social Unit
FCDO
Foreign, Commonwealth, and Development Office
FM
Financial Management
FMM
Financial Management Manual
GBV
Gender-Based Violence
GEIP
General Education Improvement Project
GHG
Greenhouse Gas
GRM
Grievance Redress Mechanism
GRS
Grievance Redress Service
GVC
Global Value Chain
HR
Human Resources
HRMIS
Human Resource Management Information System
ICT
Information and Communication Technology
IDP
Industrial Development Policy
IFR
Interim Financial Report
IPF
Investment Project Financing
IPPF
Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework
IRR
Internal Rate of Return
ISM
Implementation Support Mission
IT
Information Technology
JSDF
Japan Social Development Fund
LED
Light Emitting Diode
M&E
Monitoring and Evaluation
MCS
Ministry of Civil Service
MEF
Ministry of Economy and Finance

Official Use Only
MoEYS
Ministry of Education, Youth, and Sport
NEST
Nurturing Early Skills through Technology
NGO
Non-Governmental Organization
NPV
Net Present Value
PDO
Project Development Objective
PED
Primary Education Department
PLP
Primary Learning Program
PMU
Project Management Unit
POE
Provincial Office of Education
POM
Project Operations Manual
PPSD
Project Procurement Strategy for Development
PSC
Project Steering Committee
PS-I
Pentagonal Strategy - Phase I
RGC
Royal Government of Cambodia
SEA/SH
Sexual Exploitation and Abuse/Sexual Harassment
SEA-PLM
Southeast Asia Primary Learning Metric
SEP
Stakeholder Engagement Plan
STEP
Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement
TA
Technical Assistance
TaRL
Teaching at the Right Level
ToR
Terms of Reference
UNICEF
United Nations Children’s Fund
WASH
Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene
WBG
World Bank Group

Cambodia Basic Education Improvement Project (P508313)
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

Official Use Only
TABLE OF CONTENTS

DATASHEET ........................................................................................................................... i
I.
STRATEGIC CONTEXT...................................................................................................... 1
A. Project Strategic Context ................................................................................................................. 1
B. Sectoral and Institutional Context ................................................................................................... 2
II. PROJECT DESCRIPTION ................................................................................................... 4
A. Project Development Objective ....................................................................................................... 4
B. Theory of Change and PDO Indicators ............................................................................................. 4
C. Project Beneficiaries ........................................................................................................................ 5
D. Project Components ........................................................................................................................ 6
E. Roles of Partners ............................................................................................................................ 11
F. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design .................................................................... 12
III. PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION......................................................................................... 12
A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements .......................................................................... 12
B. Results Monitoring, Evaluation, and Verification Arrangements .................................................. 13
C. Disbursement Arrangements ......................................................................................................... 14
IV. PROJECT APPRAISAL SUMMARY ................................................................................... 14
A. Technical and Economic Analysis ................................................................................................... 14
B. Fiduciary ......................................................................................................................................... 18
C. Environmental, Social and Legal Operational Policies ................................................................... 20
V. KEY RISKS .................................................................................................................... 21
ANNEX 1. RESULTS FRAMEWORK ........................................................................................ 22
ANNEX 2: Details of Economic Analysis ............................................................................... 29

Cambodia Basic Education Improvement Project (P508313)
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

i

Official Use Only

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padbasicinformation#doctemplate
DATASHEET

BASIC INFORMATION

Project
Beneficiary(ies)
Operation Name
Cambodia
Cambodia Basic Education Improvement Project
Operation ID
Financing Instrument
Environmental and Social Risk
Classification

P508313
Investment Project
Financing (IPF)
Substantial

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padprocessing#doctemplate
Financing & Implementation Modalities
[  ] Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA)
[✓] Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC)
[  ] Series of Projects (SOP)
[  ] Fragile State(s)
[  ] Performance-Based Conditions (PBCs)
[  ] Small State(s)
[  ] Financial Intermediaries (FI)
[  ] Fragile within a non-fragile Country
[  ] Project-Based Guarantee
[  ] Conflict
[  ] Deferred Drawdown
[  ] Responding to Natural or Man-made Disaster
[  ] Alternative Procurement Arrangements (APA)
[  ] Hands-on Expanded Implementation Support (HEIS)

Expected Approval Date
Expected Closing Date
29-Aug-2025
31-Dec-2030
Bank/IFC Collaboration

No

Proposed Development Objective(s)
To improve learning outcomes in primary education

Components
Component Name
Cost (US$)

Cambodia Basic Education Improvement Project (P508313)
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

ii

Official Use Only
Improving Primary School Readiness
12,500,000.00
Leveraging Cost-Effective Solutions to Enhance Student Learning in Primary
Education
85,500,000.00
Improving Institutional Capacity for Education Staff Management and
Project Management
7,000,000.00
Contingent Emergency Response
0.00

 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padborrower#doctemplate

Organizations

  Borrower:
 Kingdom of Cambodia
  Contact
Title
Telephone No.
Email
  Seilava Ros
Secretary of State
885-23-430761
rseilava@mef.gov.kh
  Implementing Agency:
 Ministry of Education, Youth and Sport
  Contact
Title
Telephone No.
Email
  Chuon Naron Hang
Minister
855-12-843889
hang.chuon.naron@moeys.gov.kh

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padfinancingsummary#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

Maximizing Finance for Development
Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?
No
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?
No

SUMMARY
Total Operation Cost
105.00
Total Financing
105.00
of which IBRD/IDA
100.00
Financing Gap
0.00

DETAILS
World Bank Group Financing

International Development Association (IDA)
100.00

Cambodia Basic Education Improvement Project (P508313)
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

iii

Official Use Only
IDA Credit
100.00
Non-World Bank Group Financing

Trust Funds
5.00
Early Learning Partnership
5.00

IDA Resources (US$, Millions)

Credit Amount
Grant Amount
SML Amount
Guarantee
Amount
Total Amount
National
Performance-Based
Allocations (PBA)
100.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
100.00
Total
100.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
100.00

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@paddisbursementprojection#doctemplate
Expected Disbursements (US$, Millions)
WB Fiscal
Year
Annual
10.00
35.00
33.00
16.00
8.00
3.00
Cumulative
10.00
45.00
78.00
94.00
102.00
105.00

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padclimatechange#doctemplate
PRACTICE AREA(S)

Practice Area (Lead)
Contributing Practice Areas
Education

CLIMATE

Climate Change and Disaster Screening
Yes, it has been screened and the results are discussed in the Operation Document

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padrisk#doctemplate

Cambodia Basic Education Improvement Project (P508313)
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

v

Official Use Only
ESS 5: Land Acquisition, Restrictions on Land Use and Involuntary Resettlement
Relevant
ESS 6: Biodiversity Conservation and Sustainable Management of Living Natural
Resources
Not Currently Relevant
ESS 7: Indigenous Peoples/Sub-Saharan African Historically Underserved
Traditional Local Communities
Relevant
ESS 8: Cultural Heritage
Relevant
ESS 9: Financial Intermediaries
Not Currently Relevant

NOTE: For further information regarding the World Bank’s due diligence assessment of the Project’s potential
environmental and social risks and impacts, please refer to the Project’s Appraisal Environmental and Social Review
Summary (ESRS).

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padlegalcovenants#doctemplate
LEGAL
Legal Covenants
Sections and Description
Section I.A.2 of Schedule 2 to the Financing Agreement and the Grant Agreement: The Recipient shall establish and
thereafter maintain, throughout the period of implementation of the Project, a Project Steering Committee (PSC) with
terms of reference, composition and resources acceptable to the Association. The PSC shall: (a) be chaired by MoEYS
Minister and include high-level representatives of the Recipient’s MoEYS; and (b) be responsible for providing overall
strategic guidance, coordination and oversight of the Project.
Section I.A.3 of Schedule 2 to the Financing Agreement and the Grant Agreement: The Recipient shall maintain,
throughout the period of implementation of the Project, a Project Management Unit (“PMU”), with functions,
composition, staffing and resources acceptable to the Association. The PMU shall: (a) be chaired by the Recipient’s
Secretary of State; and (b) be responsible for the day-to-day implementation, management, preparation of relevant
AWPBs and procurement plan(s), monitoring and evaluation, and management of relevant environmental and social
impacts.

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padconditions#doctemplate
Conditions
Type
Citation
Description
Financing Source

Cambodia Basic Education Improvement Project (P508313)
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

Page 1

Official Use Only
I.
STRATEGIC CONTEXT

A. Project Strategic Context
1.
Cambodia has a young, predominantly rural population, with high female labor force participation but
significant gender disparities in employment quality. About 60 percent of Cambodia’s population of over 16 million lives
in rural areas.1 Children (ages 0–14) and youth (ages 15–24) constitute 29 percent and 17 percent of the population,
respectively.2 Internal migration is becoming more prevalent as people move in search of jobs. In 2022, 69.6 percent of
women were in the labor force versus 82.1 percent of men.3 However, women are less likely to be in formal, better-paid,
and secure forms of employment.4 Limited access to affordable and quality childcare services in Cambodia significantly
constrain women’s ability to participate in formal employment, as traditional gender roles often assign primary caregiving
responsibilities to mothers.
2.
In the two decades preceding the COVID 19 pandemic, Cambodia experienced uninterrupted economic
expansion. Cambodia was one of the fastest-growing economies in the world between 1998 and 2019, with a sustained
average real growth rate of 7.7 percent, driven largely by tourism, manufacturing exports, real estate, and construction.5
The country reached lower-middle-income status in 2015 and is aspiring to attain upper-middle-income status by 2030
and high-income status by 2050. Cambodia has achieved considerable improvements in socioeconomic indicators such as
health and education, but equitable access to basic public services remains a challenge. The poverty rate in the country
declined from 33.8 percent in 2009 to 17.8 percent in 2019.6
3.
However, Cambodia’s current economic success has been built largely on the expansion of relatively lowtechnology, low-wage/skill production in industries such as textiles, apparel, and basic electronics. Cambodia’s
industrial sector remains weak and narrow as it heavily relies on exporting low-value products, placing Cambodia in a low
position in the Global Value Chains (GVCs).7 Moreover, its comparative advantage in these industries is being eroded as
wages increase, making unit labor costs (as a share of value added) very high among comparators.8
4.
To maintain growth prospects in the long term and remain competitive, Cambodia must diversify its exports
and transform its labor-intensive industrial structure into a knowledge-intensive model to advance in GVCs. The
country’s Pentagonal Strategy - Phase I (PS-I) and Industrial Development Policy (IDP) (2015–2025) specifically call for
creating a competitive economy through knowledge and innovation. The Royal Government of Cambodia (RGC) has
further identified priority sectors in its IDP, including automotive, electronics, and agro-industrial sectors. Its National
Research Agenda 2025 also outlines key research areas related to these priority industries, including food production and
processing, cloud-based services, electronic and mechanical spare parts, and energy supply.
5.
Such diversification and transformation require Cambodia to ensure that its workforce has more and better
education, starting with a focus on ensuring that everyone has foundational literacy and numeracy skills. However,
Cambodia will not be able to expand its pool of high-skilled workers unless it ensures that more children have basic
numeracy skills and can read with understanding by the end of primary grades.

1 Ministry of Planning. 2020. General Population Census of the Kingdom of Cambodia 2019.
2 Ibid.
3 International Labor Organization. 2022. ILOSTAT Database.
4 World Bank. 2022. Cambodia Poverty Assessment: Toward a More Inclusive and Resilient Cambodia.
5 World Bank. 2022. Enterprising Women: Toward Equal Business Opportunity in Southeast Asia.
6 World Bank. 2022. Cambodia Poverty Assessment: Toward a More Inclusive and Resilient Cambodia.
7 RGC. 2015. Cambodia Industrial Development Policy 2015–2025.
8 World Bank. 2019. Cambodia Future Jobs.

Cambodia Basic Education Improvement Project (P508313)
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

Page 2

Official Use Only
6.
Recognizing the importance of human capital development, the RGC has made it a high priority in its PS-I.
Specifically, the strategy recognizes the central role of education in boosting economic mobility, raising incomes, and
improving employability, and, thereby, driving poverty reduction and economic growth.
B. Sectoral and Institutional Context
7.
The education sector is overseen by the Ministry of Education, Youth, and Sport (MoEYS), which is responsible
for formulating policies, managing programs, and overseeing the delivery of education services. MoEYS works closely
with subnational administrations, which, under the country’s decentralization and deconcentration reforms, have been
delegated certain responsibilities for service delivery, including education, to provincial-, district-, and commune-level
authorities. Specifically, with recent reforms, the management of early childhood and primary education teachers has
been devolved to district and municipal administrations. Non-governmental actors, including private schools and nongovernmental organizations (NGOs), also play a significant role in education delivery, particularly in rural areas. These
institutions are integrated into the education system, adhering to national curricula, standards, and examinations. In terms
of numbers, there are nearly 2.3 million enrolled primary students and over 65,000 primary teacher positions9 across
approximately 7,300 primary schools.10
8.
Education outcomes are mixed. On the one hand, Cambodia has made remarkable strides in increasing access to
education; between 2001 and 2024, primary, lower secondary, and upper secondary enrollment rates rose from 84.0 to
97.2 percent, 17.0 to 75.2 percent, and 8.0 to 44.3 percent, respectively.11 In contrast, recent assessments of students’
learning outcomes show that a significant number of students are not acquiring foundational literacy and numeracy skills.
For instance, in a national assessment conducted in 2021, 81 percent of Grade 6 students did not reach the proficient level
in math and Khmer.12 The findings from the national assessment echo those from the regional Southeast Asia Primary
Learning Metric (SEA-PLM 2019),13 which showed that only 11 percent of Grade 5 students in Cambodia were meeting the
minimum proficiency level in reading, while 19 percent were meeting the minimum proficiency level in math expected at
the end of the primary education level.14
9.
As a result of Cambodia’s participation in international assessments and the rich contextual information
collected as part of these assessments, the underlying causes of the poor education outcomes are becoming clearer.
Analysis of these assessments suggest that six principal causes explain the results: (a) limited readiness among children to
learn, resulted from inadequate access to quality childcare and early childhood education (ECE) services; (b) insufficient
teacher capacity to effectively fulfill their roles; (c) a lack of support mechanisms for students who fall behind; (d)
inappropriate learning environments, such as overcrowded classrooms; (e) shortages of key inputs, including textbooks
and infrastructure deficiencies; and (f) poor human resources management, which impedes the efficient utilization of
allocated resources.15

9 This includes (a) 44,905 ‘regular’ civil servant teacher positions; (b) 12,425 contract teacher positions; and (c) 9,255 so called ‘double shift’ teacher
positions, that is, a civil servant working an additional shift on top of her/his regular teaching or non-teaching position.
10 Ministry of Education, Youth and Sport. 2025. Education Congress.
11 Ibid.
12 The national learning assessment in 2021 grouped students into four proficiency levels: below basic, basic, proficient, and advanced.
13 Southeast Asia Ministers of Education Organization. 2019. SEA-PLM 2019 National Snapshot Report - Grade 5 Students’ Learning in Cambodia.
14 It should be noted that SEA-PLM assesses students’ learning outcomes at the end of primary education level, using Band 6 as a minimum
proficiency level students are expected to achieve. However, for Cambodia, only Grade 5 students were sampled, while the country’s primary
education system lasts for six years.
15 Each of these factors are discussed in detail in World Bank (forthcoming): Cambodia: Addressing Public Finance and Human Resource
Management Bottleneck to Education.

Cambodia Basic Education Improvement Project (P508313)
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

Page 3

Official Use Only
Education Sector Plan 2024–2028
10.
In its Education Sector Plan (2024–2028), MoEYS has outlined a plan to improve educational outcomes. The plan
aims to ensure that Cambodian children are enrolled in ECE programs and are ready for primary school at age six. It also
seeks to ensure that all primary school-aged children complete primary school with good competency in core subjects and
life skills, and that Cambodian youth complete secondary education equipped with the necessary knowledge, skills,
discipline, ethics, and behavior necessary for a better future.
11.
To achieve these goals, the plan includes several strategic actions. First, it targets 76 percent of Grade 1 entrants
having preprimary school experience by 2028. It aims to increase ECE enrollment through the provision of more
preprimary schools and well-trained ECE teachers, as well as community-based childcare centers and parental education.
Second, it aims to scale up early grade learning (EGL) in all primary schools, addressing gaps in early grade reading (EGR)
and early grade math (EGM). Currently, there are significant implementation gaps for EGR in Grade 3 and for EGM in
Grades 2 and 3. Third, it proposes interventions for students falling behind, such as additional teaching hours and learning
clubs. Fourth, it plans to attract and retain education specialists through continuous professional development (CPD) and
teacher career pathways, with an intention of producing 300 in-house education specialists by 2028. Fifth, it emphasizes
the need for school construction and renovation to reduce overcrowded classrooms, especially in suburban, northern,
and western regions.
12.
Natural disasters caused by climate change, including floods, cyclones, and extreme heat, pose significant
challenges for Cambodia, particularly affecting the continuity of education. First, approximately 10 percent of schools
are in regions with flooding less than 2 m, while 28 percent are in areas highly prone to severe flooding, with water levels
exceeding 2 m.16 Second, tropical cyclones—which can cause flooding and wind damage—affect Cambodia on average six
times per year between April and November.17 This frequent exposure to cyclones further exacerbates the risks to
educational facilities. Approximately 69 percent of educational facilities are in areas vulnerable to tropical depressions
with wind speeds below 61 km/h, whereas 31 percent are in regions exposed to cyclones with wind speeds ranging from
62 to 88 km/h.18 Extreme heat poses a growing danger to lives and livelihoods. In Phnom Penh, Cambodia, heat waves
occur 23 to 25 days annually and are expected to more than double by 2050 in some districts.19 These risks lead to
prolonged school closures, loss of instructional time, and less safe learning environments, affecting educational outcomes
and increasing dropout rates. Consequently, the project is designed to directly address climate and disaster vulnerabilities
that affect both beneficiaries and project implementation.
13.
The World Bank’s approach to support education sector development in Cambodia is comprehensive and
strategic, aiming to foster high-quality human capital by investing in connected systems from ECE to tertiary education.
The Basic Education Improvement Project (BEIP) targets foundational learning at the pre-primary and primary education
levels for long-term impact, while the General Education Improvement Project (P174335) addresses primary and
secondary education sub-sectors by enhancing governance and promoting school effectiveness standards. The Higher
Education Improvement Project (P162971) and the Second Higher Education Improvement Project (P180664) ensure that
the quality and relevance of higher education, especially in science, technology, engineering, mathematics (commonly
known as STEM) and agriculture fields, support the country’s industrial development with a skilled workforce ready for
immediate deployment in key economic sectors. This integrated approach ensures that both immediate and long-term
workforce development needs are met, and a Cambodian kid who starts school today will progress their education through

16 Mochizuki, J., Vitoontus, S., Wickramarachchi, B., Hochrainer-Stigler, S., Williges, K., Mechler, R., Sovann, R., 2015. Operationalizing iterative risk
management under limited information: fiscal and economic risks due to natural disasters in Cambodia. Int. J. Disaster Risk Sci. 6, 321–334.
17 World Bank. 2023. Cambodia: Country Climate and Development Report.
18 Ibid.
19 World Bank. 2023. Unlivable: What the Urban Heat Island Effect Means for East Asia’s Cities.

Cambodia Basic Education Improvement Project (P508313)
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

Page 4

Official Use Only
a quality education system from ECE to tertiary education. Consequently, a Cambodian student beginning his/her
education today will advance through a high-quality education system from ECE to tertiary levels.
14.
The proposed project is aligned with the Country Partnership Framework for Cambodia for FY25 to FY29  of the
World Bank Group (WBG).20 It will contribute to High-Level Outcome 1: Improved human capital outcomes and Objective
2: Improved access to quality basic education. The proposed project is also aligned with the United Nations Sustainable
Development Goal 4 (Ensure inclusive and equitable quality education and promote lifelong learning opportunities for all)
and the World Bank’s Education Strategy 2020 ‘Learning for All’. The project is also in line with the 2024–2030 WBG Gender
Strategy that highlights the needs to end all forms of gender-based violence (GBV) and acceleration of universal coverage
in education, including addressing educational underachievement, increasing access to schools with safe and inclusive
environments, and applying gender-responsive approaches from ECE to secondary completion in Outcomes 1 and 2. In
addition, Outcome 5 of the strategy emphasizes that quality childcare services improve child development outcomes,
women’s economic empowerment, family welfare, and business productivity.
II. PROJECT DESCRIPTION

A. Project Development Objective
15.
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve learning outcomes in primary education.
B. Theory of Change and PDO Indicators
16.
The following indicators will be monitored to measure the performance of project outcomes.
(a) Students supported with better education, in primary school (Number of People; Corporate Scorecard
Indicator; Disaggregated by gender)
(b) Third graders meeting minimum proficiency levels in reading (Percentage; Disaggregated by gender)
(c)
Third graders meeting minimum proficiency levels in math (Percentage; Disaggregated by gender).

17.
The project’s Theory of Change is illustrated in Figure 1.

20 World Bank.2024. Cambodia - Country Partnership Framework for the Period of FY25-FY29. Report No. CPF0000016. Washington, D.C. : World
Bank Group.
https://documentsinternal.worldbank.org/search/34393452

Cambodia Basic Education Improvement Project (P508313)
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

Page 5

Official Use Only
Figure 1. Theory of Change

C. Project Beneficiaries
18.
The direct beneficiaries include (a) approximately 2,200 children ages 0–2 years benefiting from the childcare
services, 50,000 children ages 3–5 years benefiting from the preschool expansion and primary school readiness
implementation, and 1,700,000 primary school students (47 percent female) benefiting from effective teaching practices,
distributed teaching and learning materials, and newly constructed classrooms; (b) approximately 39,500 teachers (37,000
primary school and 2,500 preschool teachers) who will receive professional development and mentoring support; (c) 1,080
working parents who use the childcare centers; and (d) 800 Provincial and District Offices of Education staff, central
department officers, and teacher trainers who will receive training, or coaching throughout the project lifespan.

Cambodia Basic Education Improvement Project (P508313)
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

Page 6

Official Use Only
D. Project Components
19.
The project’s activities have been selected because of their strong evidence base for improving student learning
outcomes at scale and in a cost-effective way.21 As discussed in the following paragraphs, the ambition of the proposed
project is to ensure that every primary school student in the country achieves a minimum proficiency in numeracy and
literacy. The project has been designed to be scalable in scope and cost, allowing it to potentially accommodate additional
financing or follow-on projects and/or additional resources from development partners (DPs), should those resources
materialize.
20.
The project is financed by an IDA Credit (US$100 million equivalent) and the Early Learning Partnership (ELP)
Multi-Donor Trust Fund (US$5 million).22 World Bank financing will fund all interventions and any activities under the
emergency response component, while the ELP grant will support only childcare interventions under Subcomponent 1.1.
The total cost of the project is US$105 million equivalent, covering all components.
21.
The proposed project will complement and build on activities already under implementation by other DPs, and an
ongoing World Bank-financed project, the General Education Improvement Project (GEIP; P174335). Specifically, first, as
discussed in more detail in Subcomponent 2.2 and Table 1, several DPs have supported the design and, in select provinces,
implementation of a best-practice approach to strengthening teaching using an EGL package. BEIP will build on these
efforts, seeking to bring them to nationwide implementation, and institutionalize them. Second, GEIP focuses on
establishing robust school governance, strengthening school management, improving accountability, and enhancing
community engagement. This governance-focused approach creates the foundational structure for the proposed project
to effectively implement its teaching and learning interventions, EGL, targeted instruction, increased instructional hours,
and enhanced teaching materials. While GEIP improves school management capacity, student assessments, and
infrastructure across 2,000 primary schools, BEIP will strengthen the teaching approach in classrooms and institutionalize
the mentoring system for teachers, not only in GEIP-targeted schools but in all primary schools (building on the foundation
laid by other DPs).
Component 1: Improving Primary School Readiness (US$12.5 million equivalent including IDA US$7.5 million equivalent
and ELP US$5 million)
22.
This component aims to enhance the primary school readiness of children and address the issues highlighted in
the sectoral context. It will implement two main strategies: (a) institutionalizing cost-effective models of full-day public
childcare services by developing approximately 60 childcare centers for 0–2-year-olds, leveraging existing public
preschools23; and (b) improving access to and quality of the public ECE system through expansion of formal ECE classes
and teacher training for 3–5-year-olds. The designs for 60 childcare centers and 20 preschool buildings will incorporate
climate-resilient construction practices, support green school initiatives, and include energy-efficient systems, as outlined
in Paragraph 61.

21 Specifically, the design draws heavily on the ‘smart buys’ identified in: Banerjee, Abhijit, Tahir Andrab, Rukmini Banerji, Susan Dynarski, Rachel
Glennerster, Sally Grantham-Mcgregor, Karthik Muralidharan, Benjamin Piper, Jaime Saavedra Chanduvi, Hirokazu Yoshikawa, Sara Ruto, and Sylvia
Schmelkes. 2023. Cost-Effective Approaches to Improve Global Learning: What does Recent Evidence Tell Us are Smart Buys for Improving Learning
in Low- and Middle-income Countries? (English). Washington, DC: World Bank Group.
22 The closing date for the Trust Fund differs from that of the project. The Trust Fund is scheduled to close on April 30, 2027.
23 It includes resourced public preschools. The existing preschool director will assume oversight responsibility for the newly constructed childcare
center, creating an integrated early childhood campus that maximizes administrative efficiency, promotes continuity of care, and ensures seamless
transition pathways for children as they progress through different developmental stages. This co-location model optimizes resource utilization by
sharing common facilities such as playgrounds and administrative offices while maintaining age-appropriate, separate learning environments.

Cambodia Basic Education Improvement Project (P508313)
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

Page 7

Official Use Only
Subcomponent 1.1: Developing Sustainable Early Childcare Service (US$10.0 million equivalent including IDA US$5
million equivalent and ELP US$5 million)
23.
The childcare centers will be developed using lessons learned from the recently completed Community-based
Childcare for Garment Factory Workers Project24 (P171063), prioritizing areas near garment or industrial factories to
support working mothers (as 80 percent of garment workers are female). The project will support the construction and
renovation of childcare center buildings, classrooms, and playgrounds, and the provision of kitchen equipment and/or
water, sanitation, and hygiene (WASH) components, based on facility standards, climate-informed designs, and individual
center needs. Healthy snacks and/or meals will also be provided to children in such childcare centers through community
support, with the scope and implementation determined by community decisions, to enhance children’s nutrition.
Comprehensive 15-day training,25 based on the updated operational manual, will be provided to MoEYS and childcare
center staff, who will be mobilized from the community. Additionally, this subcomponent will promote parental education
and raise community awareness about the importance of childcare through targeted campaigns.
24.
This program will be evaluated to inform key policy changes in childcare requirements, quality standards for early
years facilities, and public-private partnerships in childcare delivery. An impact evaluation will be conducted on the
supported childcare services to measure the impact on child development, women’s economic empowerment, and
households’ income.
Subcomponent 1.2: Improving Access and Quality of Early Childhood Education (US$2.5 million equivalent)
25.
This subcomponent aims to strengthen ECE for children ages 3–5 through improved access and enhanced quality
of ECE services. To expand access, the project will establish approximately 60 formal ECE classes attached to public primary
schools that currently lack preschool classes but demonstrate high demand for ECE. Quality improvements will be achieved
through a comprehensive capacity-building approach that includes (a) provision of teaching and learning materials and/or
equipment for 500 ongoing community-based preschools; (b) implementation of an updated teacher training program for
500 in-service teachers through in-person modalities and over 2,000 teachers through virtual delivery, with both
approaches integrating a play-centered approach; and (c) conducting of a school readiness program pilot in remote
districts without any preschools. The play-centered teacher training materials and guidelines will be developed under the
Nurturing Early Skills through Technology Project (NEST)26 (P509852) to ensure consistency across both modalities. This
subcomponent will finance the construction of preschool buildings, equipment and furniture, teaching and learning
materials, and teacher training, and other operating costs.
Component 2: Leveraging Cost-Effective Solutions to Enhance Student Learning in Primary Education (US$85.5 million
equivalent)
26.
This component supports activities that address some of the underlying causes of poor learning outcomes at the
primary level (see discussion above). The proposed subcomponents are detailed in the following paragraphs.

24 This project was funded by the Japan Social Development Fund (JSDF) to establish quality, sustainable, community-based childcare services for
garment factory workers that improve employment and labor outcomes, reduce unpaid household childcare, and improve child development.
25 The training curriculum on childcare will be incorporated into the National Preschool Teacher Training Center.
26 This project is still under preparation with grant financing from the JSDF to enhance access to and quality of ECE in the target districts by
promoting play-based learning, employing digital technology.

Cambodia Basic Education Improvement Project (P508313)
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

Page 8

Official Use Only
Subcomponent 2.1: Targeting Instruction for Learning Remediation (US$6.5 million equivalent)
27.
Targeting instruction at children’s learning level, rather than their grade level, has been identified as one of the
most cost-effective approaches for accelerating improvements in learning outcomes at scale.27 Targeted instruction is
well-suited to addressing remedial education needs, enabling children who have fallen behind in their early years of school
to catch up. Key features of this approach include assessing students; grouping them based on their learning levels;
providing structured, interactive pedagogy aligned to the learning level of each group; and conducting ongoing
assessments to track progress. Various models of targeted instruction have proven effective, including the ‘Teaching at
the Right Level’ (TaRL) approach, developed by Pratham, an NGO in India. Contextual adaptations have included
implementing targeted instruction using government teachers, community volunteers, or hired teaching assistants, and
implementing the approach as part of the standard school day, during additional school hours, or during school breaks.
28.
In 2025, with funding from the United Kingdom’s Foreign, Commonwealth, and Development Office (FCDO), TaRL
will be piloted in a select number of schools in Cambodia to generate lessons and insights for scaling targeted instruction.
The pilot will focus on Grades 4–6 and be delivered during Cambodia’s designated remedial instruction hours and during
the additional afternoon hours available in schools transitioning to full-day schedules. While this pilot is part of the FCDOsupported initiative, BEIP is also supporting targeted instruction by allocating modest resources to enable future
expansion, building on lessons learned from the pilot, by training teachers to conduct diagnostic assessments and apply
intervention packages to inclusively support students who fall behind. The subcomponent will also support other forms
of targeted instruction, including a homegrown ‘Personalized Teaching to Overcome Marginalization’, which leverages
implementation of the Primary Learning Program (PLP) to firmly assess student learning progression.
29.
This subcomponent will  support interventions to accelerate student learning through the targeted instruction
approach and finance the procurement of teaching and learning materials for teachers and students, technical assistance
(TA) to design and implement targeting instruction, equipment, teacher training, development of learning progression,
and other operating costs.
Subcomponent 2.2: Rolling out Early Grade Learning to All Primary Schools (US$43.0 million equivalent)
30.
Apart from targeted instruction, the other ‘smart buy’ to accelerate student learning in a cost-effective manner is
the implementation of EGR and EGM programs.28 These programs consist of four core activities: (a) providing teachers
with scripted lesson plans; (b) delivering initial training on how to use these scripts and new materials; (c) developing and
distributing materials to students; and (d) offering ongoing mentoring support to teachers through the deployment of
core mentors. In addition, the programs also emphasize monitoring and evaluation (M&E), providing continuous feedback
on progress being made by students. This subcomponent will thus finance the development and procurement of teaching
and learning materials, TA, equipment, teacher training, school mentoring funding,29 and other operating costs.
31.
In Cambodia, with donor support, EGR and EGM programs have already been designed; implementation has
begun; and the efforts have been rigorously evaluated, showing impressive results. This subcomponent aims to enhance
and scale up implementation efforts started in 2017 by other development partners such as United Nations Children’s

27 Banerjee, Abhijit, Tahir Andrab, Rukmini Banerji, Susan Dynarski, Rachel Glennerster, Sally Grantham-Mcgregor, Karthik Muralidharan, Benjamin
Piper, Jaime Saavedra Chanduvi, Hirokazu Yoshikawa, Sara Ruto, and Sylvia Schmelkes. 2023. Cost-Effective Approaches to Improve Global Learning:
What does Recent Evidence Tell Us are Smart Buys for Improving Learning in Low- and Middle-income Countries? (English). Washington, DC: World
Bank Group.
28 Ibid.
29 School mentoring funding is given annually to 1,400 cluster lead primary schools. Each school selects four or five teachers, vice principals, or
principals as mentors to provide mentoring to teachers in their member primary schools on innovative methods like EGL, targeted instruction, and
PLP implementation. The funding covers mentors’ travel expenses to support other teachers. Mentoring support, including cascading training to
teachers, quarterly reflection meetings, and semesterly refresher trainings at school clusters, is a cost-effective method compared to face-to-face
training that requires relocating teachers between provinces.

Cambodia Basic Education Improvement Project (P508313)
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

Page 9

Official Use Only
Fund (UNICEF) (with Global Partnership for Education financing) and Swedish International Development Cooperation
Agency to support EGR and EGM programs in primary schools. As of May 2025, development partners had rolled out EGR
programs for Grades 1–3 in two-thirds of all provinces and EGM programs in one-third of all provinces.
32.
In parallel with the gradual rollout of EGL, Cambodia has been investing in a PLP EdTech initiative covering Grades
1–3. The PLP is a learning platform that provides digital learning content aligned with the national curriculum. Students
can engage in interactive exercises categorized by subject and grade level. Teachers can assign tasks, monitor student
progress, provide feedback, create additional content, and communicate with parents through the platform. This platform
reinforces the training provided by EGL by offering a practical, technology-driven tool for teachers to apply their newly
acquired skills and track student performance. The PLP was formally launched in January 2025 and, as of April 2025, was
being used in 1,500 schools. BEIP will leverage this work and support expanding the use of the PLP EdTech platform to all
primary schools and further integrate the AI language model to assist teachers.
33.
In addition to the PLP, Cambodia is undertaking another EdTech initiative: the JSDF-funded NEST Project (P509852;
under preparation). This project supports the professional development of ECE teachers through the MoEYS Capacity
Development Platform. The platform provides learning content for ECE teachers to improve their play-based learning skills
and other ECE competencies. Both the PLP and NEST demonstrate Cambodia’s commitment to leveraging EdTech to
enhance teaching and learning across different educational levels and enhance remote and e-learning capabilities to
ensure education continuity during climate disasters and reduce climate vulnerability.
34.
The project will support rolling out both EGR and EGM programs for Grades 1–3 in all provinces, building on
lessons learned from donor-funded efforts. It will finance (a) procuring and distributing EGL materials; (b) updating EGL
materials to integrate climate change content and gender; (c) providing each school cluster30 with mentoring funding to
sustain mentoring efforts; and (d) expanding use of the PLP EdTech platform to all schools. By integrating climate change
content into the EGL materials and leveraging EdTech initiatives, the project aims to build climate resilience within the
education system. These measures will ensure that students and teachers are better prepared to handle climate-related
disruptions. This preparation is expected to contribute to the overall resilience and continuity of education during climate
disasters. To support the monitoring effort, IT experts would be deployed at each school cluster. Should additional funding
materialize, BEIP could expand EGL to also include Grades 4–6.
35.
Transitioning from successful, donor-funded interventions with limited geographic coverage to implementation
at scale through government systems requires overcoming the many technical, financial, political economy, and capability
constraints that can hinder implementation fidelity and ultimately the impacts of evidence-informed programs. The
project can address these by adopting an implementation science-informed learning agenda alongside the scale-up to
facilitate rapid iteration and adaptation. An implementation learning agenda will identify potential challenges, bottle
necks, or opportunities for efficiency gains; design right-fit evidence approaches—such as rapid testing of different
implementation features, administrative data analysis, and mixed methods process evaluations—to explore these; and
feed the results of these queries back to decision-makers in the Government with suggestions for activity adjustments
based on the findings.
36.
Relationship between EGL and targeted instruction. In both instances, EGL and targeted instruction will build on
and seek to expand efforts by other DPs. In the case of EGL, those efforts date back nearly a decade, allowing BEIP to scale
up the EGL package to every primary student in Grades 1–3 nationwide. In contrast, targeted instruction is only being
piloted in 2025, implying that less information is available on costs, impact, and the requirements for implementation at
scale. The project will support introducing targeted instruction only in a select number of schools. Another difference is
that EGL is being used during regular class hours, providing scaffolding and support for every primary teacher in Grades

30 A school cluster comprises a group of five or six primary schools situated close to each other for sharing resources and facilitating coaching
support to enhance the quality of primary education. Within each cluster, there is a core school, typically the largest, with greater resources in
terms of infrastructure and staff, along with several satellite or annex schools.

Cambodia Basic Education Improvement Project (P508313)
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

Page 10

Official Use Only
1–3, along with student learning materials for students in those classes. In contrast, in Cambodia, targeted instruction is
being introduced as a remedial program, focusing on supporting students who have fallen behind and narrowing the
heterogeneity in students’ proficiency levels within classrooms.
Subcomponent 2.3: Investing in Learning-Enhancing Infrastructure (US$36 million equivalent)
37.
As mentioned earlier, the issue of overcrowded classrooms is prevalent in Cambodian schools, with 76 percent of
primary students learning in classes with more than 30 students. Analysis of SEA-PLM 2019 data shows that these large
classes are affecting student learning. Reducing the number of such very large classes would allow teachers to pay more
attention to students’ individual needs, enforce behavioral expectations, and closely monitor students’ performance.31
38.
This subcomponent aims to improve the learning environment and will finance the climate-resilient construction
of additional classrooms in overcrowded schools, especially those with 50 or more students per class, and ensure the
availability of gender-separated toilets and WASH facilities. The school buildings must have climate-informed designs,
ensure energy efficiency, and be capable of serving as emergency shelters. This includes using light emitting diode (LED)
lighting, solar panels, rainwater harvesting, and carbon-sink-related features such as trees that can absorb carbon dioxide
from the atmosphere. (See Paragraph 61 for a comprehensive discussion of climate change considerations related to
school construction.) To improve the learning environment, the project will also provide the necessary facilities and
equipment, such as digital tools and library books. Should additional funding materialize, BEIP could increase the number
of schools that could benefit from learning-enhanced infrastructure.
Component 3: Improving Institutional Capacity for Education Staff Management and Project Management (US$7.0
million equivalent)
39.
This component aims to enhance the performance of the education service delivery chain and strengthen
planning, implementation, and monitoring capacity; coordination at both the national and subnational levels; and project
management. The proposed subcomponents are detailed in the following paragraphs.
 Subcomponent 3.1: Improving Institutional Capacity for Education Staff Management (US$2.0 million equivalent)
40.
This subcomponent aims to improve MoEYS’ institutional capacity to plan, manage, and monitor the education
workforce to support better management and quality enhancement. The proposed key activities include (a) conducting
preparatory work to support the analysis of existing systems used for providing data and policies for education staff
management, scoping meaningful activities, and mapping the key functions/modules; (b) modernizing the Human
Resource Management Information System (HRMIS) to improve data recording and availability for education staff
management, focusing on teacher distribution, CPD, and career progression, and digitalizing key human resources (HR)
business processes; and (c) strengthening the capacity of MoEYS officials to operate the modernized HRMIS.
41.
The project will adopt a phased approach to develop a functioning education staff management system. In Phase
1, the project will fund TA, workshops, or operational costs for wider stakeholder engagement and policy dialogues for
system scoping and function mapping. In Phase 2, it will support hiring a firm to develop key modules/functions of the
HRMIS based on needs and provide capacity development for using the modernized system and implementing change
management. Progression to Phase 2 is conditional on Phase 1 results demonstrating quality and feasibility in terms of (a)
technical and system development; (b) alignment with government regulations; and (c) sustainability. Modernizing HRMIS
by digitizing key processes will cut paper use and boost service efficiency, as education staff can update their personal and
career data remotely.

31 Importantly, the project will be focusing on reducing the number of large classes where there is evidence (from analysis of SEA-PLM data) that
the large number of students in a class affects student learning, rather than on reducing the average class size (or average student-teacher ratio),
where there is no evidence to suggest that such efforts would improve student learning.

Cambodia Basic Education Improvement Project (P508313)
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

Page 11

Official Use Only
 Subcomponent 3.2: Strengthening Project Management and M&E (US$5.0 million equivalent)
42.
This subcomponent will support project management, capacity development, and M&E of project progress and
outcomes. It will finance (a) capacity development and support for overall project management and coordination for
financial management (FM), procurement, and environmental and social risk management, and (b) support M&E of
project progress and outcomes. The project will also finance impact management, verification, and two impact evaluation
studies.
43.
Additionally, the subcomponent will support the digitalization of M&E processes to reduce paperwork, streamline
data collection and analysis, and enhance reporting efficiency and accuracy. This digital approach reduces the
environmental impact associated with paper use and supports climate mitigation by lowering the project’s carbon
footprint and promoting sustainable practices. By incorporating digital tools and systems for project management and
monitoring, the subcomponent enhances disaster preparedness and climate resilience, ensuring that critical functions can
continue seamlessly during disruptions. Furthermore, capacity-building initiatives will equip staff with the necessary skills
to effectively use these digital M&E tools, strengthening the overall resilience and adaptability of the project.
44.
This subcomponent will finance the incremental costs associated with project management. It includes activities
designed to ensure efficient program management and early identification of corrective measures to solve any
implementation problems. As the implementing agency, the Project Management Unit (PMU) takes on broader
coordination responsibilities for the project and would need additional resources for logistics, physical space, and
transportation. A series of workshops, such as project launch and annual review workshops, are included in this
component, together with financing for the required financial audits to support the Department of Finance. As discussed
in more detail in Paragraph 60, the project will finance various surveys to measure beneficiary satisfaction with project
interventions. These will also be used to inform the annual review workshops. The subcomponent will also finance TA,
equipment, training, and operational costs.
Component 4: Contingent Emergency Response (CERC) (US$0 million)
45.
The objective of the Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC) is to allow for the reallocation of
undisbursed financing in accordance with the IDA Immediate Response Mechanism to provide an immediate response to
any eligible crisis or emergency, as needed. The project will develop a manual for this component (CERC Manual) to ensure
that CERC can be activated at any time during an emergency. The CERC Manual will also consider climate risks, addressing
both adaptation and mitigation measures. While the CERC Manual is designed to facilitate the release of IDA financing, it
will also serve as a guiding document for the whole sector in the case of an emergency. An Emergency Action Plan will
also be prepared to confirm activities and financing for a specific event.
E. Roles of Partners
46.
Several DPs are supporting the primary education sub-sectors. On EGL, the main DPs have provided assistance in
various provinces and interventions, as shown in Table 1. Their support is expected to phase out by 2027. Due to these
one-off interventions, there are gaps in M&E for building the ministry’s capacity to sustain programs. For TaRL, FCDO plans
a 2025 pilot in 20 primary schools with a budget of about US$0.7 million. The World Bank team has engaged with the main
DPs since the project’s concept stage and will continue to collaborate during implementation to ensure support, synergy,
and sustained project activities
Table 1. Partners Involved in Supporting EGL
DPs
Number of
Provinces
EGL
Interventions
Years
EGR EGM Teacher
Training
Teacher
Package
Student
Package
Mentoring M&E
UNICEF (CDPF)
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes

Cambodia Basic Education Improvement Project (P508313)
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

Page 12

Official Use Only
DPs
Number of
Provinces
EGL
Interventions
Years
EGR EGM Teacher
Training
Teacher
Package
Student
Package
Mentoring M&E
World Vision and
Room to Read
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
UNESCO
STEP-CamII
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
RTI
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
No
VVOB
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
Notes: CDPF = Capacity Development Partnership Fund; RTI = Research Triangle Institute; UNESCO STEP-CamII =  United Nations
Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization Strengthening Teacher Education Programmes in Cambodia - Phase II; VVOB = A
non-profit organization working on education quality improvement in developing countries.

F. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design
47.
Four lessons from implementing the previous education projects and the ongoing GEIP (P174335)  to help shape
the current project’s design are as follows:
(a) Aligning the project’s ambitions with the country’s priorities. This alignment will secure political and
economic commitment to sustain the interventions. Additionally, established systems and capacities are in
place to support ownership of the reform programs.
(b) Prioritizing and phasing the key interventions. In Cambodia’s resource-constrained environment, key
interventions must be carefully selected and prioritized based on empirical evidence and rigorous costeffectiveness analysis. Without clear prioritization, resources are spread too thinly across numerous
activities, diluting their impact on learning outcomes.
(c)
Designing interventions in the most cost-effective way to decrease the fiscal cost on the Government once
the project closes. Past World Bank projects (P157858; P106605; P174335) have successfully demonstrated
that offering cost-effective ways of improving education outcomes has resulted in the Government taking
over those programs.
(d) Avoiding a narrow and provincial-based approach to implementation. Partial implementation of key reform
programs typically faces resistance and is short of long-term sustainability as the project activities will end
once the project ends.
III. PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION

A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
48.
The project will follow the existing implementation arrangements of the ongoing GEIP (P174335). MoEYS will
assume overall responsibility for the coordination and implementation of the project, including procurement,
disbursement, and FM. The project’s activities will be directly implemented by technical departments and other units at
the national and subnational levels under MoEYS. At the highest level, the Project Steering Committee (PSC), established
by MoEYS, will be responsible for the oversight of the Education Strategic Plan to streamline policy development, strategic
planning, and implementation decision-making processes. The PSC is led by the Minister of MoEYS and comprises MoEYS
leaders, including Secretaries of State and/or Under Secretaries of State. At the implementation level, the PMU, chaired
by the Secretary of State and comprising relevant Under Secretaries of State, the Secretariat General, Director Generals,
Deputy Secretariat General, Deputy Director General, and Department Directors, will support the PSC and provide day-to-

Cambodia Basic Education Improvement Project (P508313)
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

Page 13

Official Use Only
day implementation oversight, FM monitoring, procurement, project progress reporting, auditing, M&E, and reviewing
the operational plans.
49.
The Ministry of Civil Service (MCS) will offer advice and guidance in the development of the HRMIS, ensuring
alignment with the MCS HRMIS modernization roadmap. This will ensure that the comprehensive modules developed for
education can be adapted for use by the MCS with minor modifications. A formal working group comprising members
from both ministries will be established.
Figure 1. Organogram

Note: AU = Administrative Unit; DCD = Department of Curriculum Development; DDT = Department of Digital Transformation; DHR =
Department of Human Resources; DGTED = Directorate General of Teacher Education development; DME = Department of
Monitoring and Evaluation; DoE = District Office of Education; DNFIE = Department of Non-Formal and Inclusive Education; DSPC =
Department of State Property and Construction; ECED = Early Childhood Education Department; EQID = Education Quality Inspection
Department; FU = Financial Unit; GS = General Secretariat; PED = Primary Education Department; PoE = Provincial Office of
Education; PU = Procurement Unit; TDD = Teacher Development Department; TED = Teacher Education Department; TTC = Teacher
Training Center.
B. Results Monitoring, Evaluation, and Verification Arrangements
50.
M&E. The project will utilize the Results Framework to monitor and evaluate progress in the implementation of
activities and achievement of the PDO. The Results Framework comprises PDO‐level and intermediate results indicators,
baselines and target values, frequency, data source methodology, and responsibilities for data collection. Whenever
possible, data collected will be disaggregated by gender. Data to monitor the project and inform the indicators will be
obtained from three primary sources: official government data, surveys/evaluations, and progress reports produced by
the PMU. The M&E activities will be conducted by the PMU, including monthly meetings chaired by the project manager,
quarterly meetings chaired by the project directors, and biannual meetings chaired by the minister and attended by the
World Bank team. The PMU will oversee the overall coordination of all M&E tasks and ensure consolidated reporting of
results in the Results Framework. The PMU will be supported by qualified specialists and assistants, who will manage the
Implementing Units
Primary school clusters, preschools,
primary schools
PoEs, DoEs, Schools
Supporting Units
All PoEs and DoEs
PSC
Minister, Secretaries of State, Under Secretaries of State, Secretariat General,
Directors General, Deputy Secretariat General, Deputy Directors General
PMU
Project Director: Secretary of State/Under Secretary of State
Deputy Project Director(s): Under Secretary of State
Project Manager: Deputy Secretariat General/Deputy Director General
Deputy Project Manager and Coordinator: PED Director
Central Departments: PED, ECED, DCD,
EQID, DGTED, TED, TDD, TTCs, DNFIE
Central Departments:
AU, FU, PU, DSPC, DDT,
DME
C1, C2.1, and C2.2
C3.1
Central Departments:
GS, DGTED, DHR, TED,
TDD, DDT
C2.3 and C3.2

Cambodia Basic Education Improvement Project (P508313)
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

Page 14

Official Use Only
day‐to‐day M&E activities of the project according to the provisions outlined in the Project Operations Manual (POM).
Further details of the results monitoring and evaluation arrangements are provided in the POM.
51.
Implementation support. The World Bank will provide implementation support through biannual implementation
support missions (ISMs). These missions will be conducted in collaboration with MoEYS and MCS. The ISMs aim to (a)
improve monitoring and evaluating results in the field; (b) facilitate timely implementation and risk identification; and (c)
provide support on capacity risks related to sectoral and technical aspects of the project and fiduciary concerns. ISMs will
involve field visits, reviews of implementation plans, and compliance follow-up with MoEYS to enhance its management
capability.
C. Disbursement Arrangements
52.
Two segregated Designated Accounts (DAs) in US dollars will be opened at the National Bank of Cambodia. The
DA will have a variable ceiling equivalent to a two-quarter cash forecast. The primary disbursement methods will be
reimbursement, advances, special commitment, and direct payments. Supporting documentation required for eligible
expenditures paid from the DA will be the Statement of Expenditure. Direct payments will be documented by records.
Prior review expenses will be supported by a summary sheet. The frequency of reporting of expenditures paid from the
DA shall be quarterly. The minimum application size for reimbursements, special commitment, and direct payments will
be indicated in the Disbursement and Financial Information Letter.

IV. PROJECT APPRAISAL SUMMARY

A. Technical and Economic Analysis
53.
The project is expected to generate a significant development impact by improving the quality of primary
education. Its development objective is to improve learning outcomes in primary education—specifically, to strengthen
students’ foundational skills in numeracy and reading. The project’s long-term economic benefits stem from these
improved skills, which are expected to translate into higher labor earnings when today’s students reach adulthood. Public
sector provision and financing are appropriate in this context because foundational education is a public good with strong
positive externalities, and equitable access cannot be assured through market mechanisms alone—particularly in rural
and disadvantaged areas. Government financing ensures nationwide reach, sustainability, and integration with national
education reforms, while leveraging economies of scale in teacher training, curriculum development, and infrastructure
provision. To support this goal, the project will enhance teaching quality through coaching, professional development, and
provision of pedagogical materials. The project will achieve its objectives through six key interventions: (a) development
of childcare centers; (b) expansion of preschool coverage; (c) implementation of a targeted remedial education initiative
that groups students based on learning needs; (d) nationwide rollout of a structured EGL program, successfully piloted in
Cambodia; (e) construction of new classrooms to reduce overcrowding; and (f) provision of WASH facilities.
54.
The cost-benefit analysis demonstrates strong economic returns, with the internal rate of return (IRR)
estimated between 14.3 and 21.7 percent, and the net present value (NPV) ranging from US$500 million to US$1.8
billion. The projected improvements in learning outcomes will increase the future productivity and earning potential of
students—the primary beneficiaries—over a 50-year horizon following project implementation. The discounted value of
these private gains is compared against the discounted project costs to calculate NPV and IRR. These estimates are derived
using three sets of assumptions: conservative (pessimistic), central, and optimistic scenarios. The World Bank’s value
added lies in its global technical expertise in foundational learning and early childhood education, its experience in
applying evidence-based pedagogical approaches (such as TaRL and structured pedagogy) in low- and middle-income
countries, and its ability to mobilize international best practices, rigorous impact evaluation methods, and convening
power to coordinate development partners. The World Bank’s prior engagement in Cambodia’s education sector provides

Cambodia Basic Education Improvement Project (P508313)
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

Page 15

Official Use Only
strong analytical underpinnings, ensures alignment with national reform priorities, and supports capacity building for
sustainable implementation.
Table 2. Summary of Cost-Benefit Analysis by Scenario

NPV (US$, millions)
Benefit/Cost
Ratio
IRR
(percentage)
Conservative scenario
5.6
14.3
Central scenario
1,088
11.2
18.4
Optimistic scenario
1,795
17.8
21.7
Note: Economic benefits are the sum of the lifetime additional income earned by the benefitting pupils compared to a
situation where they would not have benefitted from the project.
55.
Gender. In terms of education outcomes in the primary grades, there are only small gender differences between
boys and girls, suggesting that additional gender-targeted efforts may not be needed at this point. At the primary level,
there are virtually no differences in enrollment rates or test score results, with boys scoring only marginally lower on
assessments (that is, SEA-PLM scores are only 1, 2, and 4 percent lower for boys compared to girls in math, reading, and
writing, respectively). However, gender gaps widen beyond the primary grades, with boys less likely to transition to
secondary schools (61 percent for boys compared to 70 percent for girls). Given this, while the early grades (the focus of
BEIP) do not appear to require additional gender-targeted measures, the project will track gender-disaggregated
progression and learning data to monitor whether gaps emerge or widen during implementation. If they do, targeted
interventions will be mobilized, such as tailored remedial support, and gender-sensitive retention strategies – for example,
engaging parents to address socio-cultural barrier, providing mentoring programs for at-risk boys, offering flexible learning
schedules, and strengthening school-to-community outreach to support continued enrollment.
56.
More significant gender differences emerge in the labor market, where the project aims to help narrow these
gaps. While women’s labor force participation is high compared with other countries, it is still significantly below that of
men: 69.6 percent for women versus 82.1 percent of men. Moreover, women are less likely to be in formal, better paid,
and secure forms of employment. Gendered care responsibilities, particularly the lack of accessible childcare, further
restrict women’s opportunities to formal sector work as well as self-employed work. Cambodian women perform around
90 percent of unpaid care and domestic work and spend on average, more than five hours per day on caregiving, compared
to just over two hours for men.32  Employers report that two-thirds of large firms experience female staff, leaving early,
or quitting altogether due to childcare responsibilities.33  By providing childcare options for women working in factories,
the project aims to reduce an important barrier that prevents women from accessing better-paid, more secure, and more
formal forms of employment.  The project will track the percentage of women employed or reemployed as a result of
these childcare interventions, capturing the extent to which this activity contributes narrowing labor market gender gaps.
57.
GBV. Tackling GBV remains a paramount concern in Cambodia, as highlighted by PS-I (2023–2028) and the national
gender strategic plan, Neary Rattanak VI (2024–2028). However, there is a significant lack of comprehensive data on GBV
prevalence, overall, in the education sector, among vulnerable populations, and in remote areas. The ongoing GEIP aims
to shed more light on the problem through improved monitoring. Some data are available but these data focus on women
ages 15 and above, not on primary school-aged children who are the focus of this project. For instance, according to the
2022 Cambodia Demographic and Health Survey, 10 percent of women ages 15–49 have experienced physical violence
since the age of 15, and 3 percent have faced sexual violence. Women residing in rural areas are at a heightened risk of
enduring physical intimate partner violence. Despite the widespread nature of GBV, many individuals do not acknowledge
the power imbalance between men and women as the fundamental cause of domestic violence.34

32 World Bank. 2024. Supply of and Demand for Accessible and Affordable Childcare Services in Cambodia.
33 Ibid.
34 Mauney, R. 2015. Gender-Based Violence in Ethnic Minority Communities: Ratanak Kiri Province.

Cambodia Basic Education Improvement Project (P508313)
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

Page 16

Official Use Only
58.
Gender focal points of MoEYS have been coordinating GBV-related activities for MoEYS primarily through the
ongoing GEIP (P174335) to ensure sustainability of the system’s GBV prevention and response mechanisms. GEIP’s design,
which promotes school-based management frameworks, provides an appropriate foundation for building systemic
capacity on the ground. BEIP will complement and build upon this established foundation. Under GEIP’s additional
financing, GBV programs have been integrated into project design, with specific indicators incorporated into the
monitoring framework. Current GEIP support includes the recruitment of a dedicated GBV TA team within MoEYS’ gender
team, a comprehensive desk review of GBV cases to inform policy development, development of an action plan for GBV
prevention and response, and implementation of teacher training programs on GBV awareness and response. Additionally,
GEIP facilitates adaptation of the sexual exploitation and abuse/sexual harassment (SEA/SH) grievance redress mechanism
(GRM) through its implementation support. Upon establishment of these foundational elements, BEIP will conduct GBVrelated teacher training programs for public primary education teachers, complementing the capacity-building efforts
initiated under GEIP and ensuring comprehensive coverage across the education system.
59.
Disability and inclusion. To promote the inclusion of rural and disadvantaged children who fall behind, the project
will strengthen the education system’s support to these children through TaRL and the expansion of ECE services. The
project allocates funds to purchase supplementary books for students from low-income families who are at risk of
dropping out or underperforming academically. To promote the inclusion of children with disabilities, the project will (a)
ensure that newly constructed school buildings adhere to universal design principles, including the construction of ramps,
accessible toilets, and other accessibility features to create an inclusive and accessible learning environment for all
students; and (b) under Component 2, the project will convert existing EGL materials into braille for students with vision
disabilities. These actions complement the ongoing GEIP in supporting disability screening, teacher training, and referrals
in the education sector.
60.
Citizen engagement. The project will actively involve citizens through extensive consultations and inclusive
decision-making during its preparation and implementation. Various tools like consultations and surveys will be used to
measure beneficiary satisfaction with project interventions, focusing on their views on teaching and learning quality and
other key metrics. For example, a teacher survey will be conducted annually to gather feedback on their experiences with
EGL and targeted instruction, and the feedback collected will help assess the effectiveness of these approaches and guide
necessary adjustments to enhance learning outcomes. A citizen engagement indicator is also included in the project
Results Framework: the percentage of teachers who consider that the training sessions met their needs. This indicator will
measure the share of teachers who report that the targeted support is effectively meeting their needs, and results
received will feed back into the iterative improvement of the teaching and learning activities supported by the project.
Additionally, the project will implement a GRM to ensure timely responses to feedback, inquiries, and comments from
stakeholders.
61.
Climate co-benefits. The project will integrate activities to address climate vulnerabilities and enhance both
adaptation and mitigation benefits. An allocation of US$3.7 million from a total of US$12.5 million for Component 1, and
US$36 million from Subcomponent 2.3, will be dedicated to the climate-resilient construction of school buildings and
childcare centers. This will involve the use of sustainable building materials that enhance natural ventilation and
incorporate energy-efficient systems, such as LED lighting, tree planting to reduce cooling needs, and solar panel
installation. These improvements will ensure that the structures can withstand climate-related events (mainly floods and
cyclones) and serve as emergency shelters. To measure the effectiveness of these efforts, a climate-related indicator—
Number of classrooms constructed and rehabilitated with climate-resilient infrastructure—is included in the Results
Framework. This indicator will track the extent to which the constructed buildings adhere to climate-resilient design
principles. Furthermore, Subcomponent 2.2 will also finance the development of capabilities for remote learning/elearning that can support education continuity in the event of climate disasters and decrease climate vulnerability through
the expansion of EdTech initiatives including the modernization and expansion of PLP. Finally, Component 3 will allocate
US$7 million for the modernization (including digitalization) of HR management and M&E processes to enhance climate

Cambodia Basic Education Improvement Project (P508313)
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

Page 17

Official Use Only
adaptation and mitigation. By adopting digital workflows for HR functions and M&E processes, the project will significantly
reduce paper consumption and lower carbon emissions. Additionally, capacity-building initiatives will ensure that officials
are trained to use these digital tools effectively from any location, reducing commuting needs and enhancing disaster
preparedness and climate resilience.
62.
Paris Alignment. The project is aligned with the goals of the Paris Alignment on both mitigation and adaptation.
(a) The proposed project is consistent with climate commitments and strategies. On mitigation, Cambodia’s
Nationally Determined Contribution, updated in 2020 to the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change, and the Long-Term Strategy for Carbon Neutrality commit to reducing emissions and
achieving carbon neutrality. The activities supported by the project do not hinder these mitigation goals. On
adaptation, the project directly supports Cambodia’s primary adaptation strategies by constructing climateresilient school buildings and developing climate change content for teacher training. These efforts align with
the National Adaptation Plan, which emphasizes the importance of resilient infrastructure and education in
adapting to climate change impacts. Additionally, the project is in line with the recommendations of WBG
Cambodia Country Climate and Development Report (CCDR) 35, which highlights the need for resilient
education facilities to mitigate the impacts of climate change, including floods and cyclones.
(b) Assessment and reduction of mitigation risks. The project includes universally aligned activities such as
teacher training, development of instructional materials, institutional capacity building, mentoring, and
information and communication technology (ICT) equipment provision, all aimed at improving the quality of
basic education. The construction of classrooms and childcare center buildings presents a low risk of
negatively affecting the country’s low- greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions development pathways, as the
project will adhere to climate-smart design principles to lower GHG emissions. These principles include using
environmentally friendly construction materials, installing energy-efficient appliances, and applying passive
design strategies like planting trees and optimizing window size to maximize natural light while minimizing
heat gain. These buildings will not use fossil fuels for operating energy-intensive equipment and appliances.
Instead, they will be grid-connected and, to a certain extent, powered by solar panels to promote the use of
renewable energy sources.
(c)
Assessment and reduction of adaptation risks. Cambodia faces significant climate-related hazards, including
floods, extreme heat, and tropical cyclones. Despite these risks, the residual level of risk is low due to the
incorporation of climate-resilient design standards. New infrastructure will be situated in less vulnerable
areas, with designs including elevated foundations to prevent flooding and water damage in flood-prone
areas. The design will also incorporate improved insulation, energy-efficient cooling systems, and natural
ventilation, which will help maintain comfortable indoor temperatures during extreme heat events and
reduce energy consumption. Additionally, landscaping with trees and vegetation will be integrated into the
design to create cooler microclimates and provide natural barriers against strong winds and tropical
cyclones, enhancing the resilience of the built environment. The project will also address climate risks for all
investments, including the procurement of ICT equipment. This will involve selecting ICT equipment designed
to withstand extreme temperatures and humidity, ensuring that it remains functional during heatwaves and
heavy rainfall. Equipment will be housed in climate-controlled environments to protect against temperature
fluctuations and moisture damage. An innovative EdTech initiative will ensure continuity of education during
climate-induced disruptions, enhancing learning opportunities for students and providing ongoing

35 WBG Cambodia CCDR, September 2023
https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/099092823045083987/pdf/P17887106c6c2d0e909aa1090f3e10505c1.pdf

Cambodia Basic Education Improvement Project (P508313)
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

Page 18

Official Use Only
professional development for teachers, thereby strengthening the education system’s resilience to climate
impacts.
B. Fiduciary

(i) Financial Management (FM)
63.
An FM assessment for the proposed project was conducted on May 21, 2025. The assessment concluded that the
project meets the World Bank’s minimum FM requirements, as stipulated in the World Bank Policy/Bank Directive for
Investment Project Financing (IPF). The fiduciary risk for the project is rated Moderate, with the following identified risks:
(a) The current FM staff at the Directorate General of Administration and Finance may be overloaded,
potentially leading to delays in processing transactions and reporting.
(b) The delayed approval of the Annual Work Plan and Budget (AWPB) may hinder the timely implementation
of project activities.
(c)
There is a risk that school mentoring funding, which is to be spent at the schools, may not be properly
monitored.
64.
To mitigate these risks, the following actions will be taken. First, the project’s Financial Management Manual
(FMM), including a simplified AWPB template and contents, and the guidelines on the School Mentoring Funding have
been developed and adopted (as a part of POM). Second, adequate FM staff, including government officers and
consultants, will be appointed within three months of the project signing.
65.
Financial accounting and reporting. Interim financial reports (IFRs) will be prepared and submitted by the PMU
within 45 days after the end of each reporting period in the form of a presentation and with content to be approved by
the World Bank. The IFRs will serve as the basis for quarterly advances to the DA (the format and contents of the IFR will
be provided in the FMM). Annually, the PMU will submit audited financial statements covering project activities. The
financial statements will be prepared following acceptable accounting standards. The project will use a cash basis of
accounting, which aligns with the Government’s public FM reform and adopts the RGC’s chart of accounts. Appropriate
accounting software will be selected for project accounting. The current accounting practices and functionality of SAGE
(used for ongoing financed projects) have been assessed as satisfactory and should be considered for the project.
66.
Internal and external audit. The Internal Audit Department of MoEYS will be responsible for conducting internal
audits for this project, as outlined in the terms of reference (ToR) included in the project’s FMM. Although previous
internal audits were conducted on an ad hoc basis without sharing the ToR with the World Bank, the internal audit
capability of MoEYS will be evaluated, and technical support will be provided if necessary. For external audits, an
independent external auditing firm hired by the Ministry of Economy and Finance (MEF) will audit the project’s financial
statements annually. These statements will adhere to a ToR acceptable to the World Bank. The audited financial
statements must be submitted to the World Bank within six months after the end of the reporting period and will be
disclosed on MoEYS’ website.
(ii) Procurement
67.
Procurement will be carried out in accordance with the World Bank’s Procurement Regulations for IPF Borrowers,
dated February 2025, World Bank’s Guidelines on Preventing and Combating Fraud and Corruption in Projects Financed
by IBRD Loans and IDA Credits and Grants, dated October 15, 2006, and revised in January 2011 and as of July 1, 2016,
and provisions stipulated in the Financing Agreement. The approaches to national markets (National Procurement and
Request for Quotations) will be carried out in accordance with the Kingdom of Cambodia’s Updated Standard Operating
Procedures and Procurement Manual for All Externally Financed Projects/Programs (‘Procurement Manual’), promulgated
through the Sub-Decree No. 181 ANK/BK, dated December 2, 2019, subject to the additional provisions included in the

Cambodia Basic Education Improvement Project (P508313)
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

Page 19

Official Use Only
Procurement Plan. The World Bank planning and tracking system, Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement
(STEP), will be used to prepare, clear, and update Procurement Plans and conduct all procurement transactions for the
project.
68.
A procurement assessment for the proposed project was conducted on May 1, 2025. The assessment revealed
that the Procurement Unit of MoEYS, which will be responsible for the overall procurement activities for the project, has
experience with many World Bank-financed projects, including the ongoing GEIP, and has demonstrated satisfactory
procurement performance, with procurement activities completed as planned. The overall procurement risk assessment
is rated Moderate, with the following identified risks: (a) MoEYS staff’s limited knowledge and experience with the World
Bank’s Procurement Regulations, potentially resulting in project implementation delays and noncompliance; (b) possible
delays in receiving technical inputs for procurement; (c) governance risks, including corrupt practices in procurement; (d)
inadequate capacity for contract supervision and management, which may result in implementation delays; and (e)
possible delays in internal clearance from procurement review committee.

69.
The risk mitigation measures proposed are as follows:
(a) Assign at least one full-time government procurement officer for the project.
(b) Enhance coordination between implementing departments to expedite the acquisition of technical inputs
and assign a focal person to ensure effective coordination within the technical departments and across
ministries.
(c)
Implement enhanced disclosure of procurement information through the publication of the annual
Procurement Plan and quarterly summaries of contract awards on MoEYS’ website and in newspapers,
establish a procurement complaint handling mechanism in alignment with the Government Procurement
Rules and Regulations of the MEF and the World Bank, and reinforce transparency through monitoring and
reporting on action points.
70.
The World Bank will provide targeted contract management training to the project’s procurement team to
enhance their supervisory and management capabilities. Furthermore, implementing agencies will agree on the service
standard to be included in POM, a procurement tracking form will be implemented, and sufficient delegation of authority
will be provided to members of Bid Evaluation Committee/Consultants Evaluation Committee/Procurement Review
Committee.
71.
The Borrower, with the support of the World Bank, has prepared a Project Procurement Strategy for Development
(PPSD) to inform fit-for-purpose procurement arrangements in the Procurement Plan. The PPSD was reviewed by the
World Bank and finalized. The international competitive market approach will be used for major procurements, and
selection of consultants involving international competition will be carried out in accordance with the Procurement
Regulations for IPF Borrowers. The PPSD identified community school buildings as major procurement activities to be
carried out in small procurement packages. These packages would not be attractive to the international market and will
therefore be procured through open national and subnational approaches, respectively.
72.
Based on the findings and recommendations of the PPSD, the initial 18-month Procurement Plan has been
prepared. The Procurement Plan will be entered in STEP and updated annually (or as needed) by the MEF and MoEYS to
(a) reflect project implementation; (b) accommodate changes that should be made; and (c) add new packages as needed
for the project. The Procurement Plan and any updates or modifications shall be subject to World Bank’s prior review and
no objection. The World Bank will carry out procurement post reviews on an annual basis with an initial sampling rate of
10 percent, which will be adjusted periodically during project implementation, based on project performance.

Cambodia Basic Education Improvement Project (P508313)
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

Page 22

Official Use Only
 ANNEX 1. RESULTS FRAMEWORK

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padannexresultframework#doctemplate

PDO Indicators by PDO Outcomes

Baseline
Period 1
Period 2
Period 3
Period 4
Closing Period
To improve learning outcomes in primary education
Students supported with better education, in primary school (Number of people) CRI
Dec/2025
Dec/2026
Dec/2027
Dec/2028
Dec/2029
Dec/2030
1,100,000
1,400,000
1,700,000
1,700,000
➢Students supported with better education, in primary school - Female (Number of people) CRI
Dec/2025
Dec/2026
Dec/2027
Dec/2028
Dec/2029
Dec/2030
517,000
658,000
799,000
799,000
Third graders meeting minimum proficiency levels in reading (Percentage)
Dec/2025
Dec/2026
Dec/2027
Dec/2028
Dec/2029
Dec/2030
➢Third graders meeting minimum proficiency levels in reading - Female (Percentage)
Dec/2025
Dec/2026
Dec/2027
Dec/2028
Dec/2029
Dec/2030
Third graders meeting minimum proficiency levels in math (Percentage)
Dec/2025
Dec/2026
Dec/2027
Dec/2028
Dec/2029
Dec/2030
➢Third graders meeting minimum proficiency levels in math - Female (Percentage)
Dec/2025
Dec/2026
Dec/2027
Dec/2028
Dec/2029
Dec/2030

Intermediate Indicators by Components

Baseline
Period 1
Period 2
Period 3
Period 4
Closing Period
Improving Primary School Readiness
New entrants to primary schools who have participated either in school readiness program or preschools supported under the project (Number of people)

Cambodia Basic Education Improvement Project (P508313)
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

Page 23

Official Use Only
Dec/2025
Dec/2026
Dec/2027
Dec/2028
Dec/2029
Dec/2030
5,000
15,000
30,000
40,000
50,000
Children enrolled in childcare services supported under the project (Number of people)
Dec/2025
Dec/2026
Dec/2027
Dec/2028
Dec/2029
Dec/2030
1,500
2,250
2,250
➢Number of children enrolled in childcare services - Female (Number of people)
Dec/2025
Dec/2026
Dec/2027
Dec/2028
Dec/2029
Dec/2030
1,125
1,125
Mothers with children enrolled in childcare services that report improved economic outcomes (Percentage)
Dec/2025
Dec/2026
Dec/2027
Dec/2028
Dec/2029
Dec/2030
Development and adoption of a childcare training at the National Preschool Teacher Training Center (Yes/No)
Dec/2025
Dec/2026
Dec/2027
Dec/2028
Dec/2029
Dec/2030
No
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Leveraging Cost-Effective Solutions to Enhance Student Learning in Primary Education
People provided with basic hygiene (Number of people) CRI
Dec/2025
Dec/2026
Dec/2027
Dec/2028
Dec/2029
Dec/2030
30,000
60,000
90,000
100,000
➢People provided with basic hygiene - Female (Number of people) CRI
Dec/2025
Dec/2026
Dec/2027
Dec/2028
Dec/2029
Dec/2030
15,000
30,000
45,000
50,000
➢People provided with basic hygiene - Youth (Number of people) CRI
Dec/2025

Dec/2030

Early grade learning packages distributed (Number)
Dec/2025
Dec/2026
Dec/2027
Dec/2028
Dec/2029
Dec/2030
448,000
896,000
1,344,000
1,792,000
2,240,000
Primary schools implementing learning management program (Number)
Dec/2025
Dec/2026
Dec/2027
Dec/2028
Dec/2029
Dec/2030
1,500
3,000
4,000
5,000
6,000
7,000
Primary teachers receiving mentoring and coaching support to improve teaching (Percentage)
Dec/2025
Dec/2026
Dec/2027
Dec/2028
Dec/2029
Dec/2030
➢Primary teachers receiving mentoring and coaching support to improve teaching - Female (Percentage)

Cambodia Basic Education Improvement Project (P508313)
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

Page 24

Official Use Only
Dec/2025
Dec/2026
Dec/2027
Dec/2028
Dec/2029
Dec/2030
Teachers trained who consider that the training sessions met their needs (Percentage)
Dec/2025
Dec/2026
Dec/2027
Dec/2028
Dec/2029
Dec/2030
➢Teachers trained who consider that the training sessions met their needs - Female (Percentage)
Dec/2025
Dec/2026
Dec/2027
Dec/2028
Dec/2029
Dec/2030
Teachers trained (Number of people)
Dec/2025
Dec/2026
Dec/2027
Dec/2028
Dec/2029
Dec/2030
7,500
22,000
40,300
40,300
40,300
➢Teachers trained - Female (Number of people)
Dec/2025
Dec/2026
Dec/2027
Dec/2028
Dec/2029
Dec/2030
5,300
15,000
28,600
28,600
28,600
Teachers using effective teaching practices (Percentage)
Dec/2025
Dec/2026
Dec/2027
Dec/2028
Dec/2029
Dec/2030
Classrooms constructed and rehabilitated with climate resilient infrastructure (Number)
Dec/2025
Dec/2026
Dec/2027
Dec/2028
Dec/2029
Dec/2030
Improving Institutional Capacity for Education Staff Management and Project Management
Human Resource Management Information System (HRMIS) roadmap developed (Yes/No)
Dec/2025
Dec/2026
Dec/2027
Dec/2028
Dec/2029
Dec/2030
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Education staff inputting their data on the modernized HRMIS (Percentage)
Dec/2025
Dec/2026
Dec/2027
Dec/2028
Dec/2029
Dec/2030
Impact evaluation of the key project interventions (Number)
Dec/2025
Dec/2026
Dec/2027
Dec/2028
Dec/2029
Dec/2030
Contingent Emergency Response

Cambodia Basic Education Improvement Project (P508313)
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

Page 25

Official Use Only
Monitoring & Evaluation Plan: PDO Indicators by PDO Outcomes

To improve learning outcomes in primary education in target areas
Students supported with better education, in primary school (Number of people) CRI
Description
This indicator measures the number of primary school students supported through project activities. This is calculated
using the total number of primary education students enrolled, with new intake added annually. Disaggregated by
gender.
Frequency
Annual
Data source
Education Management Information System Database
Methodology for Data
Collection
Report of enrollment rate in schools receiving intervention under the project
Responsibility for Data
Collection
Department of Education Mananagement Information System; PED
Third graders meeting minimum proficiency levels in reading (Percentage)
Description
This indicator measures the percentage point increase (relative to the baseline measure) in the proportion of Grade 3
students achieving minimum proficiency in reading, as measured by a standardized assessment. The definition of
‘minimum proficiency’ will be aligned with the Global Proficiency Framework’s definition of minimum proficiency level
in reading at Grade 3 and consistent with SDG 4.1.1a. Disaggregated by gender.
Frequency
Annual
Data source
PLP Database
Methodology for Data
Collection
Standardized Assessment
Responsibility for Data
Collection
EQID; PED
Third graders meeting minimum proficiency levels in math (Percentage)
Description
This indicator measures the percentage point increase (relative to the baseline measure) in the proportion of Grade 3
students achieving minimum proficiency in math, as measured by a standardized assessment. The definition of
‘minimum proficiency’ will be aligned with the Global Proficiency Framework’s definition of minimum proficiency level
in math at Grade 3 and consistent with SDG 4.1.1a. Disaggregated by gender.
Frequency
Annual
Data source
PLP Database
Methodology for Data
Collection
Standardized Assessment
Responsibility for Data
Collection
EQID; PED
Monitoring & Evaluation Plan: Intermediate Results Indicators by Components
Improving Primary School Readiness
New entrants to primary schools who have participated either in school readiness program or preschools supported under the project
(Number of People)
Description
This indicator measures the number of children enrolling in primary schools who have previously participated in either
a primary school readiness program or preschool supported under the project.
Frequency
Annual
Data source
PED and ECED Reports
Methodology for Data
Collection
Report of enrollment in preschool and readiness program
Responsibility for Data
Collection
ECED; PED
Children enrolled in childcare services supported under the project (Number of People)

Cambodia Basic Education Improvement Project (P508313)
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

Page 26

Official Use Only
Description
This indicator measures the number of children enrolling in childcare centers established in target resource
preschools. Disaggregated by gender.
Frequency
Annual
Data source
Childcare Center Report
Methodology for Data
Collection
Report of enrollment in childcare centers under the project
Responsibility for Data
Collection
 ECED
Mothers with children enrolled in childcare services that report improved economic outcomes (Percentage)
Description
This indicator measures the percentage of mothers with children in childcare services who report improved economic
outcomes out of all mothers with children in childcare services.
Frequency
Three times over the project period
Data source
Impact Evaluation data
Methodology for Data
Collection
Impact evaluation for all mothers with children in the childcare services supported by the project
Responsibility for Data
Collection
 ECED
Development and adoption of a childcare training at the National Preschool Teacher Training Center (Yes/No)
Description
This indicator tracks if the childcare training program is developed and officially adopted by the National Preschool
Teacher Training Center.
Frequency
Annual
Data source
Official Document
Methodology for Data
Collection
Confirmation of the official adoption of the training program into the pre-service curriculum
Responsibility for Data
Collection
ECED; PSTTC
Leveraging Cost-Effective Solutions to Enhance Student Learning
People provided with basic hygiene (Number of People)
Description
This indicator tracks the number of children enrolling in childcare centers, preschools, and primary schools receiving
WASH facilities under the project. Disaggregated by gender. Youth disaggregation (for age 15-24) is not applicable for
this project.
Frequency
Annual
Data source
Enrollment Data
Methodology for Data
Collection
Enrollment data of the childcare centers, preschools, and primary schools with provision of WASH facilities
Responsibility for Data
Collection
PED; School Health Department
Early grade learning packages distributed (Number)
Description
This indicator measures the number of EGL learning packages delivered to students at the start of each school year to
improve equitable access to quality education. Annually, the project delivered EGL packages to 20% of the total
primary school students across the countries. The targets are cumulative.
Frequency
Annual
Data source
Activity report
Methodology for Data
Collection
Activity report
Responsibility for Data
Collection
PED
Primary schools implementing learning management program (Number)
Description
This indicator measures the number of primary schools that have adopted and are actively using learning
management programs, specifically the PLP for teaching, learning, and assessment. During the baseline, there were

Cambodia Basic Education Improvement Project (P508313)
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

Page 27

Official Use Only
7,398 primary schools nationwide, of which 1,500 were registered on PLP.
Frequency
 Annual
Data source
 PLP Database
Methodology for Data
Collection
 System Report
Responsibility for Data
Collection
 PED
Primary teachers receiving mentoring and coaching support to improve teaching (Percentage)
Description
The indicator measures the percentage of primary teachers who have received mentoring and coaching support to
improve teaching. Disaggregated by gender.
Frequency
Annual
Data source
Mentoring Database
Methodology for Data
Collection
System Report
Responsibility for Data
Collection
PED
Teachers trained (Number of People)
Description
This indicator measures the number of teachers trained in ECE play-based approach, EGL structured pedagogy and
targeted instruction. It also includes the number of educaitonal staff receiving training and coaching. Disaggregated by
gender.
Frequency
Annual
Data source
The lists of teachers, school directors/deputy directors/educational staff trained
Methodology for Data
Collection
The lists of teachers, school directors/deputy directors/educational staff trained will be updated annually.
Responsibility for Data
Collection
PED; ECED
Teachers trained who consider that the training sessions met their needs (Percentage)
Description
This indicator measures the number of teachers trained in EGL structured pedagogy who consider that the trainings
met their needs. Disaggregated by gender.
Frequency
 Annual
Data source
 Mentoring Database
Methodology for Data
Collection
 Training Survey
Responsibility for Data
Collection
 PED; DGTED
Teachers using effective teaching practices (Percentage)
Description
This indicator measures the percentage of teachers who are (a) actively using the EGL package and (b) demonstrating
effective teaching practices. A classroom observational tool will be used to track this.
Frequency
Annual
Data source
PLP Database and Kobo System
Methodology for Data
Collection
Classroom observation tools
Responsibility for Data
Collection
EQID; PED; ECED
Classrooms constructed and rehabilitated with climate resilient infrastructure (Number)
Description
This indicator measures the number of ECE and primary classrooms that have been constructed or rehabilitated using
climate-resilient infrastructure. The focus is on ensuring that educational facilities are built or upgraded to withstand
the impacts of climate change.
Frequency
Annual
Data source
DSPC Report

Cambodia Basic Education Improvement Project (P508313)
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

Page 28

Official Use Only
Methodology for Data
Collection
Data on the number of rehabilitated and constructed buildings will be reported by DSPC.
Responsibility for Data
Collection
EMIS, DSPC, PED, ECED
Improving institutional capacity for education management and project management
Human Resource Management Information System (HRMIS) roadmap developed (Yes/No)
Description
This indicator is for the development of the HRMIS roadmap after (a) clearly analyzing the existing systems used for
providing data and policies for education staff management, (b) scoping the meaningful activities, and (c) mapping the
key functions/modules.
Frequency
Annual
Data source
HRMIS Database
Methodology for Data
Collection
Report
Responsibility for Data
Collection
DHR; DGTED; MCS
Education staff inputting their data on the modernized HRMIS (Percentage)
Description
This indicator measures the percentage of education staff who have successfully input their data into the modernized
system.
Frequency
 Annual
Data source
 HRMIS Database
Methodology for Data
Collection
 Report
Responsibility for Data
Collection
DHR; DGTED
Impact evaluation of the key project interventions (Number)
Description
This indicator reflects the impact evaluation of the interventions on (a) EGL and TaRL and (b) childcare service
Frequency
Twice over the project period
Data source
Impact Evaluation
Methodology for Data
Collection
Report
Responsibility for Data
Collection
External evaluation organization; Department of Policy

Cambodia Basic Education Improvement Project (P508313)
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

Page 29

Official Use Only

ANNEX 2: Details of Economic Analysis
1.
This annex provides details behind the economic analysis. The analysis covers six core interventions within the
project: (a) establishment of childcare centers; (b) creation of additional seats at the preprimary level to expand access
(US$1.2 million); (c) implementation of the TaRL approach (US$5.0 million); (d) national rollout of the EGL program
(US$43.0 million); (e) construction of new classrooms to alleviate overcrowding (US$36.0 million); and (f) provision of
school sanitation infrastructure (WASH facilities). Qualitative interventions at the childcare (US$4.0 million) and
preprimary (US$1.4 million) levels are not included in the economic analysis, as their potential impacts, while likely
positive, are not yet sufficiently evidenced in the Cambodian context.
2.
The primary beneficiaries of the project are the cohorts of students who will be reached by the various
interventions. These can be grouped into two categories: (a) approximately 1.7 million students directly benefiting from
pedagogical interventions (TaRL and EGL) during the project’s implementation period; and (b) around 600,000 students
(25 cohorts) who will benefit from infrastructure improvements over the 25-year operational life of the new facilities. In
addition, approximately 40,000 teachers will receive training. While direct impacts on teacher outcomes are not
estimated, any improvements in teaching quality are expected to benefit the students.
3.
The project is expected to enhance students’ foundational skills in literacy and numeracy. These improved
competencies by the end of primary school are assumed to translate into higher skill levels at workforce entry. Although
improved learning may also lead to increased educational attainment at secondary or tertiary levels, the analysis focuses
on skills as the primary channel for long-term benefits. The economic multipliers used in this analysis capture the
relationship between increased skill levels and labor earnings, implicitly accounting for some of these indirect effects.
4.
To quantify potential benefits—both from increased access and improved quality—the analysis draws on a range
of sources, including economic literature, recent randomized control trials in Cambodia, and results from the SEA-PLM
2019 regional assessment. As noted in a related technical note, the expected impact of each intervention is a gain of 15
to 20 test score points, equivalent to 0.3 to 0.4 years of additional schooling.
5.
Present value and IRR calculations are based on the assumption that students will enter the workforce
approximately 10 years after the project incurs its costs (given that most targeted students are 9–10 years old). To
estimate lifetime labor earnings, the analysis uses a generic wage-age profile that links earnings directly to age and skill
level, rather than to educational attainment. This approach is appropriate, as the project aims to improve learning
outcomes rather than increase years of schooling. In the absence of Cambodia-specific wage-age-skill data, the model
adjusts future earnings based on current average wages and applies an assumed annual labor productivity growth rate of
2.6 percent. Benefits are projected to accrue over 50 years after labor market entry.
6.
The analysis uses a real discount rate of 3 percent.38 As future benefits are expected to grow at the same rate as
productivity (2.6 percent), discounting is based on this real time preference rate.
7.
To estimate the monetary value of skill gains, three key assumptions are made: (a) the extent to which a 1-point
gain in primary-level test scores translates to improved adult skill levels; (b) the link between adult skill levels and labor
earnings; and (c) the relationship between future labor earnings and current average wages.
8.
Each assumption is modeled under conservative, central, and optimistic scenarios to assess the range of potential
benefits.
9.
Based on these scenarios, the present value of a 1-point gain in test scores is estimated at

38 This is consistent with a 5.6 percent real interest rate.

Cambodia Basic Education Improvement Project (P508313)
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

Page 30

Official Use Only
(a) US$25 under the conservative scenario;
(b) US$39 under the central scenario; and
(c)
US$53 under the optimistic scenario.

10.
The total benefits and benefit-cost ratios of the project are calculated by summing the impact of each intervention
(Table 2.1).

11.
For infrastructure investments, capital costs are incurred upfront, while benefits are distributed over 75 years—
25 cohorts earning income for 50 years each. Given this longer delay in benefit realization, the benefit-cost ratio is lower
than that of pedagogical interventions. At a 3 percent discount rate, the average benefit per cohort represents about 71
percent of that received by the first cohort. Operational costs, mainly related to teaching, are also spread over the
infrastructure’s useful life and are discounted accordingly.

Table 2.1. Benefit-Costs Ratios under Different Scenarios by Subcomponents
Subcomponents
Conservative
Central
Optimistic
TaRL
14.3
30.2
47.3
EGL
9.6
17.2
26.2
Childcare centers
0.0
0.4
1.2
New preschool
2.8
9.3
19.3
New classrooms
1.3
3.1
5.7
WASH facilities
39.8
104.3
181.5
All
5.6
11.2
17.8
Note: Benefit-cost ratios do not account for operating costs such as teaching costs.
