===== SOURCE FILE: BOSIB-88261f66-a795-4abc-9d2f-b29586ce710d.pdf =====

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Report No: PADHI00530

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION

PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
ON A
PROPOSED CREDIT

IN THE AMOUNT OF US$102 MILLION

TO THE

ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF PAKISTAN

FOR A

RESILIENT AND ACCESSIBLE MICROFINANCE (RAM) PROJECT
FEBRUARY 20, 2025

Finance, Competitiveness and Innovation Global Practice
South Asia Region

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their official
duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS

(Exchange Rate Effective {Jan 31, 2025})

Currency Unit =   PAKISTAN RUPEE
(PKR)
PKR 278.64 = US$1
SDR 0.766974 = US$1

FISCAL YEAR
July 1 - June 30

Regional Vice President: Martin Raiser
Regional Director: Mathew A. Verghis
Country Director: Najy Benhassine
Practice Manager: Gabi George Afram
Task Team Leader(s): Namoos Zaheer

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

ADB
Asian Development Bank
AFIC
Agriculture Finance Innovation Challenge
AM
Accountability Mechanism
ATC
Agricultural Technology Company
CAR
Capital Adequacy Ratio
CE
Citizen Engagement
CEDREP
Climate and Disaster Resilience Enhancement Program
CGAP
Consultative Group to Assist the Poor
CLF
Contingent Liquidity Facility
CRF
Climate Risk Fund
DA
Designated Account
EAGR
Enterprise and Assets Growth Program
ESS
Environment and Social Standards
FCDO
Foreign, Commonwealth & Development Office
FIIP
Financial Inclusion and Infrastructure Project
FM
Financial Management
FY
Fiscal Year
GDP
Gross Domestic Product
GIZ
Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (German Agency for
International Cooperation)
GoP
Government of Pakistan
GRS
Grievance Redress Service
GSFF
Global Shield Financing Facility
IAL
Innovative Agricultural Liquidity
IFC
International Finance Corporation
IFI
International Financial Institution
IPF
Investment Project Financing
M&E
Monitoring and Evaluation
MFB
Microfinance Bank
MFD
Maximizing Finance for Development
MFI
Microfinance Institution
MFP
Microfinance Provider
MIS
Management Information System
MSME
Micro, Small, and Medium Enterprise
NAP
National Adaptation Plan
NBMFC
Non-Bank Microfinance Company
NPL
Non-Performing Loan
PCE
Private Capital Enabling
PDO
Project Development Objective
PKR
Pakistani Rupee
PMIC
Pakistan Microfinance Investment Company
PMN
Pakistan Microfinance Network
POM
Project Operating Manual
RAM
Resilient and Accessible Microfinance
RSP
Rural Support Programme
SBP
State Bank of Pakistan
SEA/SH
Sexual Exploitation and Abuse/ Sexual Harassment

SECP
Securities and Exchange Commission of Pakistan
US$
United States Dollar
WB
World Bank
WBG
World Bank Group
WIF
Women Inclusive Finance Sector Development Program

Pakistan: Resilient and Accessible Microfinance (RAM) Project (P181037)

TABLE OF CONTENTS

DATASHEET ........................................................................................................................... i
I.
STRATEGIC CONTEXT ..................................................................................................... 1
A. Project Strategic Context ................................................................................................................. 1
B. Sectoral and Institutional Context ................................................................................................... 2
II.
PROJECT DESCRIPTION .................................................................................................. 5
A. Project Development Objective ....................................................................................................... 5
B. Theory of Change and PDO Indicators ............................................................................................. 5
C. Project Beneficiaries ........................................................................................................................ 6
D. Project Components ........................................................................................................................ 7
E. Role of Partners ..............................................................................................................................11
F. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design ....................................................................12
III. PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION ........................................................................................ 12
A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements ..........................................................................12
B. Results Monitoring, Evaluation, and Verification Arrangements ..................................................14
C. Disbursement Arrangements .........................................................................................................14
IV. PROJECT APPRAISAL SUMMARY .................................................................................. 14
A. Technical, Economic and Financial Analysis (if applicable) ............................................................14
B. Fiduciary .........................................................................................................................................17
C. Environmental, Social and Legal Operational Policies ...................................................................17
D. Grievance Redress Services ...........................................................................................................18
V. KEY RISKS .................................................................................................................... 18
ANNEX 1. RESULTS FRAMEWORK ........................................................................................ 20

Pakistan: Resilient and Accessible Microfinance (RAM) Project (P181037)

i

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padbasicinformation#doctemplate
DATASHEET
BASIC INFORMATION
Project
Beneficiary(ies)
Operation Name
Pakistan
Pakistan: Resilient and Accessible Microfinance (RAM) Project
Operation ID
Financing Instrument
Environmental and Social Risk
Classification

P181037
Investment Project
Financing (IPF)
Moderate

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padprocessing#doctemplate
Financing & Implementation Modalities
[  ] Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA)
[  ] Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC)
[  ] Series of Projects (SOP)
[  ] Fragile State(s)
[  ] Performance-Based Conditions (PBCs)
[  ] Small State(s)
[✓] Financial Intermediaries (FI)
[  ] Fragile within a non-fragile Country
[  ] Project-Based Guarantee
[  ] Conflict
[  ] Deferred Drawdown
[  ] Responding to Natural or Man-made Disaster
[  ] Alternative Procurement Arrangements (APA)
[  ] Hands-on Expanded Implementation Support (HEIS)
Expected Approval Date
Expected Closing Date
17-Mar-2025
31-Dec-2029
Bank/IFC Collaboration
Joint Level
Yes
Complementary or Interdependent project requiring active coordination
Proposed Development Objective(s)
To enhance access to microcredit and support resilience of the microfinance sector and its borrowers.
Components
Component Name
Cost (US$)

Pakistan: Resilient and Accessible Microfinance (RAM) Project (P181037)

ii

Climate Risk Fund
125,000,000.00

 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padborrower#doctemplate

Organizations

 Borrower:
 Islamic Republic of Pakistan
 Contact
Title
Telephone No.
Email
 Implementing Agency:
 Ministry of Finance through State Bank of Pakistan, State Bank of Pakistan
 Contact
Title
Telephone No.
Email
 Amjad Mahmood
Additional Secretary
Finance
0092519201847
mahmood.amjad@gmail.com
 Irfan Ali
Executive Director
00922132455178
syed.irfan@sbp.org.pk

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padfinancingsummary#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)
Maximizing Finance for Development
Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?
Yes
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?
Yes

SUMMARY
Total Operation Cost
125.00
Total Financing
125.00
of which IBRD/IDA
102.00
Financing Gap
0.00
DETAILS
World Bank Group Financing

International Development Association (IDA)
102.00
IDA Credit
102.00
Non-World Bank Group Financing

Trust Funds
23.00

Pakistan: Resilient and Accessible Microfinance (RAM) Project (P181037)

v

ESS 9: Financial Intermediaries
Relevant
NOTE: For further information regarding the World Bank’s due diligence assessment of the Project’s potential
environmental and social risks and impacts, please refer to the Project’s Appraisal Environmental and Social Review
Summary (ESRS).

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padlegalcovenants#doctemplate
LEGAL
Legal Covenants
Sections and Description
The Recipient, through the Ministry of Finance, shall ensure that the Trust Deed contains the necessary rights for it to
comply with its obligations to cause State Bank of Pakistan to carry out the Project in accordance with the provisions of
the Financing Agreement, as well as to require State Bank of Pakistan to carry out the Project: (a) with due diligence
and efficiency; (b) in conformity with appropriate administrative, technical, financial, economic, environmental and
social standards and practices, and shall not assign, amend, abrogate, or waive, or permit to be assigned, amended,
abrogated, or waived, any provision of the Trust Deed without the prior written consent of the Association.
The Recipient, through the Ministry of Finance, shall cause State Bank of Pakistan to adopt the Project Operations
Manual, acceptable to the Association, and shall cause State Bank of Pakistan to: (a) administer and manage the affairs
of the Climate Risk Facility and the property of the Climate Risk Facility in good faith and to the best of its ability and
without gaining any undue advantage for itself or any of its related parties (including connected persons and group
companies or its officers) in accordance with the Trust Deed, Investment Guidelines and Project Operations Manual; (b)
fulfil the objectives of the Climate Risk Facility in accordance with the provisions of the Trust Deed, Investment
Guidelines and Project Operations Manual; (c) review the performance of the Climate Risk Facility on a regular and
timely basis in accordance with the Project Operations Manual; (d) maintain a timely record of the decisions relating to
investments made by the Climate Risk Facility; (e) with respect to the Climate Risk Facility, prepare within four (4)
months of the end of the Fiscal Year: (i) a balance sheet stating details of investments depicting cost and realizable
value of such investments and liability; (ii) profit and loss statement; (iii) cash flow statement; and (iv) statement of
movement in net assets, all in conformity with the applicable international accounting standards and international
financial reporting standards; and (f) make available or ensure to be made available such information regarding the
Climate Risk Facility that the Recipient and/or the Association may request from time to time.

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padconditions#doctemplate
Conditions
Type
Citation
Description
Financing Source
Effectiveness
5.01(a)
The Trust Deed, in form and
substance acceptable to
the Association, has been
executed between the
Recipient, through its
Ministry of Finance and
State Bank of Pakistan and
registered in accordance
IBRD/IDA, Trust Funds

Pakistan: Resilient and Accessible Microfinance (RAM) Project (P181037)

vi

with the legal requirements
of the Recipient.
Effectiveness
5.01(b)
The Recipient, through the
Ministry of Finance, has
caused State Bank of
Pakistan to adopt the
Project Operations Manual,
in form and substance
acceptable to the
Association
IBRD/IDA, Trust Funds
Effectiveness
5.01(c)
The Co-financing
Agreement has been
executed and delivered and
all conditions precedent to
its effectiveness or to the
right of the Recipient to
make withdrawals under it
(other than the
effectiveness of this
Agreement) have been
fulfilled
IBRD/IDA, Trust Funds
Disbursement
B.1(b)
No withdrawals can take
place under Category 2
until the Recipient has
ensured, to the satisfaction
of the Association, that a
sufficient amount in its
currency has been
requested in its budget
allocation in respect of the
Financing.
IBRD/IDA, Trust Funds

Pakistan: Resilient and Accessible Microfinance (RAM) Project (P181037)

Page 1

I. STRATEGIC CONTEXT

A. Project Strategic Context
1.
The Resilient and Accessible Microfinance (RAM) project has been designed in the context of the increasing
climate risks faced by the microfinance sector, in particular flood risk, and the lessons learned from the catastrophic
floods that hit Pakistan in 2022. The climate risks facing microfinance providers (MFPs) are particularly large given that
the sector caters to the financing needs of economically vulnerable borrowers, whose exposure to climate risks is more
pronounced than that of borrowers from commercial banks. The sector, while being a key conduit of financing for most
of the borrowers from the formal financial system in Pakistan predominantly caters to those borrowers who have
traditionally struggled securing access to finance from mainstream banking. This includes women, small borrowers in the
agriculture sector, borrowers in rural Pakistan, and borrowers who fall at the bottom of the economic pyramid. These
borrowers also include farmers seeking alternatives to exploitative informal sources of finance (colloquially known as”
aartis” or middlemen) in Pakistan’s agriculture sector.   The project is fully aligned with the Country Partnership Framework
(CPF) for Pakistan (FY 26 -35) and the 1.89 million expected beneficiaries of the project (of which 1.04 million will be
women and 351,540 will be youth) feeds directly into outcome 3 of the CPF – Increased Resilience to Climate Change.

2.
The project is anchored in a 10-year vision for sustained growth and increased resilience of the microfinance
sector.  To ensure broad based buy-in and strategic alignment, this vision has been prepared jointly with the International
Finance Corporation (IFC), and in close collaboration with the State Bank of Pakistan (SBP), the Pakistan Microfinance
Network (PMN), international financial institutions (IFIs) and donors.  The vision for the sector entails a series of strategic
interventions to address lingering market failures with the aim of doubling of the real borrower pool, focusing on women
and agriculture borrowers.  The vision builds on the WB’s engagement in recent years to bolster financial inclusion in
Pakistan leveraging the microfinance sector and digital finance. This engagement has entailed support for upstream
reforms through the Finance for Growth Development Policy Credit (P161136), in addition to other development policy
credits. The reform efforts have been complimented with investment projects (e.g. Pakistan Financial Inclusion and
Infrastructure Project (FIIP) - P159428 and Pakistan Housing Finance Project - P162095). The World Bank Group (WBG)
engagement has also included support given by IFC through both equity investments and advisory services over the past
two decades, in addition to the recent establishment of a risk sharing facility for the largest microfinance bank in Pakistan.
The RAM project will be the first in a series of projected interventions to support the sector, to be designed and phased
in close partnership with other IFIs, particularly the Asian Development Bank (ADB). The ADB is spearheading efforts to
accelerate women’s financial inclusion through its Women Inclusive Finance Program and synergies across operations
have been optimized. In the second phase of support to the sector, the WB and IFC may develop and operationalize a risk
sharing facility for the sector, subject to approvals from the Government of Pakistan (GoP) and WBG Board.  This de-risking
instrument will complement ADB’s de-risking intervention for women.

3.
The project lies at the intersection of the GoPs development priorities centered on climate change, financial
inclusion and economic empowerment. The project will support climate adaptation, resilience and recovery, in line with
the National Climate Change Policy (2021) of the GoP. Mitigating climate risks and adapting to climate change remain
amongst the foremost priorities of the government given Pakistan’s vulnerability to climate change. The country ranks
among the top 10 countries worldwide most affected by climate change and natural disasters.1 The exposure of the
country and its productive sectors to climate change was highlighted by the floods of 2022 which inundated  one-third of
the country, affected 33 million people and caused damages exceeding US$14.9 billion.2 These acute vulnerabilities led to

1 Eckstein, David, Vera Künzel, and Laura Schäfer. Global Climate Risk Index 2021. Briefing Paper, Germanwatch.
2 Government of Pakistan. 2022. Pakistan Floods 2022 Post-Disaster Needs Assessment. Ministry of Planning Development & Special Initiatives.

Pakistan: Resilient and Accessible Microfinance (RAM) Project (P181037)

Page 2

Pakistan being selected as a Global Shield pathfinder country, facilitating financing support under the WBs GSFF. The
project will also enhance financial inclusion through the provision of liquidity to the sector, in line with the National
Financial Inclusion Strategy of Pakistan which was adopted by the GoP in 2015 and updated in 2021. It will also enhance
economic empowerment of those at the bottom of the economic pyramid in particular women and households operating
in rural areas which are more prone to climate shocks, through incentives that will reduce the gender gap in access to
microfinance.

B. Sectoral and Institutional Context
4.
Pakistan’s microfinance sector is at the heart of the financial inclusion agenda. Despite being a relatively smaller
feature of the financial sector in Pakistan, with a loan portfolio only amounting to 7.6 percent of commercial banks, the
sector caters to a significantly larger number of borrowers. As of June 2024, the sector accounted for approximately 72
percent of all the borrowers in the financial sector (10.5 million out of the total 14.5 million). The outreach of the
microfinance sector in Pakistan, both on the lending and deposit side, is indicative of the importance to the importance
of the sector for financial inclusion, entrepreneurship, and poverty alleviation.  The sector also plays a pivotal role in
consumption smoothing and the resilience of individuals, households and micro, small and medium enterprises (MSMEs)
against shocks (both climatic and economic). The sector has also contributed significantly to financial awareness and
literacy, which has been a foundational enabler of agent banking and digital payments in the country.

5.
The sector is the primary formal financing channel for women and the poor in Pakistan, in addition to segments
that have been traditionally excluded from the financial mainstream. With an average loan size of US$191 and an
average savings balance of US$20, the sector caters to the financing needs of underserved and unserved population
segments, overcoming barriers and constraints that other financial institutions have historically failed to unlock. When
compared to the banking sector in absolute terms, the microfinance sector serves three times more female borrowers,
five times more borrowers within the agriculture and livestock sectors, and about twice as many MSMEs. The sector is
also significantly pivoted towards underserved segments in relative terms. Women account for 45 percent of all borrowers
in the microfinance sector, while 21 percent of all borrowers were operating in the agriculture and livestock sectors as of
June 2024. The nature of lending (approximately 58 percent of all lending by microfinance bank’s is not backed by
collateral) has also meant that the sector has fostered financial inclusion by giving access to finance to segments that
would otherwise be ineligible for financing from the formal financial system. This is particularly the case for women.
Figure 1: Comparison of MFPs with Commercial Banking Sector
Sources: Pakistan Microfinance Network, State Bank of Pakistan, WB team estimates

6.
The sector has grown significantly over the past decade leveraging both deposits and funding from the broader
financial sector to generate loans. Sectoral outreach has grown at a compounded annual growth rate of over 15 percent
0.0
2.0
4.0
6.0
8.0
10.0
12.0
Active Borrowers
Female
Agriculture /
Livestock
MSMEs
Microfinance Providers
Banks

Pakistan: Resilient and Accessible Microfinance (RAM) Project (P181037)

Page 3

in the past decade, reaching over 10.5 million active borrowers by June 2024. Growth was supported by strengthened
institutional structures and significant improvements in the regulatory framework. In the early 2000s, the microfinance
sector consisted of an apex institution, the Pakistan Poverty Alleviation Fund, and about 30 microfinance providers, most
operating under broad regulatory categories (e.g. non-governmental organizations and trusts) rather than financial
intermediaries. In 2024, the sector consists of a wholesale lender, the Pakistan Microfinance Investment Company (PMIC),
11 microfinance banks (MFBs) regulated by the SBP, 39 non-bank microfinance companies (NBMFCs) and five Rural
Support Programmes (RSPs) regulated by the Securities and Exchange Commission of Pakistan (SECP). The sector is also
represented at the policy level by a well capacitated industry association – the PMN.

Figure 2: Growth in Outreach to Financially Excluded Segments
Table 1:  Sector Composition

MFBs
NBMFCs
(including RSPs)
Regulator
SBP
SECP
Legal /
Regulatory
Framework
Microfinance
Institutions
Ordinance;
Regulations for
MFBs
Companies
Ordinance; NBFC
Rules; NBMFC
Regulations
No. of
Institutions
39 NBMFCs; 5
RSPs
No. of
Borrowers
7.6 million
2.9 million
Gross Loan
Portfolio
US$1.5 billion
US$439 million

Sources: Pakistan Microfinance Network, State Bank of Pakistan, WB team
estimates
Sources: Pakistan Microfinance Network, State Bank of Pakistan, Securities and
Exchange Commission of Pakistan
7.
Despite this significant growth in recent years, the sector nonetheless serves less than one-quarter of its
potential market size, is small relative to peer countries, while macro growth numbers hide concerning undercurrents.
The sector serves 26.2 percent of its potential market size of 40 million borrowers in the country, which leaves a significant
gap in outreach, while also indicating significant potential for growth.3 The size and outreach of the sector also lags
compared to peer economies. Unadjusted for differentials in gross domestic product (GDP) and population, Pakistan’s
microfinance sector, as sized by the outstanding loan portfolio, is 5 percent the size of India’s, 20 percent of Bangladesh’s,
and 33 percent of the Philippines. It is also important to note that macro growth numbers mask the underlying reality that
most of the growth in recent years has stemmed from the rapid growth in nano loans, which tend to be focused on urban
borrowers for consumptive purposes. Nano loans are small size (average of US$10) and short-term (30-60 days) loans that
are mostly used for consumption smoothing. Nano loans have grown by 342 percent over the past five years, in contrast
to a 17 percent growth in the origination of conventional microfinance loans during the same period (see Figure 2). This
indicates an alarming pivot away from lending for productive purposes to consumption smoothing.

8.
Growth momentum witnessed over the past decade has come under pressure off the back of repeated
exogenous shocks, in particular climatic shocks. The microfinance sector has been hit by a series of shocks in recent years
in the form of locust attacks in 2019, the COVID-19 pandemic starting in 2020, and, more recently, the 2022 floods. The

3 Jassim, Jaffar, Bilal Ghani, Amna Imtiaz, and Amal Naeem Qureshi. June 2019. “Estimating the Potential Market for Microfinance in Pakistan including Credit,
Savings, Payments and Insurance.” MicroNOTE No.40, Pakistan Microfinance Network.

10.5
4.8
2.29
0.3
2.9
 -
 2.0
 4.0
 6.0
 8.0
 10.0
 12.0
2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024
Active Borrowers
Female
Rural
Agriculture / Livestock
Microenterprises
Nano

Pakistan: Resilient and Accessible Microfinance (RAM) Project (P181037)

Page 4

impact of these shocks was exacerbated by the macroeconomic crisis brewing since late 2019. While the shocks and
macroeconomic crisis have hit the entirety of the economy, the impact has been larger on the microfinance sector due to
its portfolio being concentrated in rural areas, in agriculture, and in areas which are prone to climatic shocks. The impact
has also been larger given that the sector serves vulnerable population groups with fewer resources/buffers to rebuild
and recover losses quickly. The impact on growth is captured in the fact that annual growth of the sector receded to 2.4
percent in 2023, from an annual average of 19.1 percent over the period 2018-22.

9.
The floods in 2022 took a significant toll on the sector, impacting the loan portfolio, capital adequacy and
liquidity of the sector. This had significant negative implications for the sector’s ability to continue lending both in flood
impacted areas and more generally. As the floods made their way across the country from June 2022, the impact was felt
immediately by the microfinance sector. Just three months later in September 2022, non-performing loans (NPLs) of MFBs
in flood impacted areas surged by 25.7 percent from the previous quarter (i.e., from June to September 2022) and
increased substantially by 53.4 percent year-on-year (i.e. since September 2021). NPLs at an aggregate increased from 6.5
percent to 7.8 percent. This in turn resulted in the rapid erosion of liquidity and capital of the MFBs.  As provisioning
expenses (recognition of losses and cleaning of books stemming from NPLs) surged by 50.8 percent from June to
September 2022, capital adequacy declined from 14.9 percent to 11.7 percent, against a regulatory minimum of 15
percent. The erosion of capital, as reflected in the decline in capital adequacy ratio (CAR), significantly impaired the ability
of the sector to continue lending, and there was an immediate derisking from the flood impacted areas where recovery
loans were direly required. MFBs have highlighted that had they had the liquidity to continue lending after the floods,
many impacted borrowers would had the breathing space to recover livelihoods by focusing on the next crop cycle. It is
pertinent to note here that while the portfolios of NBMFCs were also impacted by the floods, this impact did not translate
into a substantial impact on the CAR. NBMFCs, however, did face serious liquidity constraints because of the floods,
stemming from the financial sector at large derisking from the microfinance sector and significantly limited lending to the
sector, particularly to NBMFCs.

10.
Beyond their immediate impact, increased flood events, especially the catastrophic 2022 floods, have led to a
structural shift in the sector, which is gradually pivoting away from agriculture.  The share of agriculture in total lending
of MFBs has declined from 34 percent in fiscal year (FY)19 to 28 percent in FY24. The sector’s share has also declined
significantly in the lending portfolio of NBMFCs, declining from 16 percent in FY19 to 4.9 percent in FY24. It is also
important to highlight that the existing agriculture portfolio has witnessed average loan sizes grow significantly – an
indicator that the sector is de-risking away from small farmers, with implications on poverty, equity, and inclusion. This
shift has taken place even though the agriculture sector accounts for almost 20 percent of GDP and for 40 percent of those
employed in the country. Given the increasing flood risks facing the agriculture sector (which is leading to trends in
disintermediation from such lending), there is a need to derisk the agriculture sector through measures geared towards
enhanced climate adaptation and resilience to mitigate the climate risks in agricultural lending.

11.
Preliminary risk modelling shows that the microfinance sector is significantly exposed to climatic risks. At the
sectoral level, a 1-in-a-20-year flood, as an example, would impact 705,000 borrowers and US$189 million in lending. A 1in-a-10-year flood would impact approximately 432,000 borrowers and US$114 million in lending. The analysis undertaken
reflects a base case scenario given that it does not consider all types of natural calamities (the analysis is limited to floods
and does not consider exposure to – and impact of – droughts, extreme heat etc.). The analysis also reflects a base case
given that it is limited to the current beneficiaries of the microfinance sector and does not consider the damages caused
to – and the needs of – residents of climate impacted areas who are currently not borrowing from the microfinance sector.

12.
The climate risks and structural challenges faced by the microfinance sector, coupled with its central role in
financial inclusion in the country, provide a strong rationale for the proposed project. The microfinance sector continues

Pakistan: Resilient and Accessible Microfinance (RAM) Project (P181037)

Page 5

to play an important part in financial inclusion in Pakistan, for women and economically fragile segments in particular.
Moreover, the sector has an integral role to play in promoting adaptation, resilience, mitigation, and transition of
livelihoods affected by climate change. There is a need to support sectoral growth for financing the real economy
anchored in access, efficiency and affordability.

13.
The Resilient and Accessible Microfinance (RAM) project aims to enhance the resilience of the microfinance
sector and its borrowers in Pakistan, in addition to enhancing access to finance. It will do so through the establishment
and operationalization of a Climate Risk Fund (CRF), partly funded by a US$23 million grant from the World Bank’s (WB)
Global Shield Financing Facility (GSFF).4 The CRF will provide contingent liquidity to the microfinance sector after qualifying
climatic shocks to enhance resilience and recovery of the sector and its borrowers. Additionally, a portion of the CRF will
provide liquidity to the sector to incentivize institutions and borrowers to partner with innovative agricultural technology
companies (ATCs) to enhance resilience and climate adaptation at the borrower level (pre-climate event). While the CRF
will eventually cover all types of climate risks, the funding provided under the RAM project will be limited to covering
flood risk.

II. PROJECT DESCRIPTION

A. Project Development Objective
14.
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to enhance access to microcredit and support resilience of the
microfinance sector and its borrowers.
B. Theory of Change and PDO Indicators
15.
The following indicators will be used to measure achievement of the PDO:
(a) People covered by disaster risk finance and insurance (number) (corporate scorecard sub-indicator)5
(b) CRF liquidity which is deployed to originate loans within 60 days of qualifying floods (percentage)
(c) People benefitting from increased resilience of livelihoods, jobs or firms (number) (corporate scorecard subindicator)

16.
The PDO and intermediate indicators are designed to monitor progress towards achieving the key outcomes
sought by the project.  Two PDO level indicators, (a) and (c) above, (targeting 1.89 million beneficiaries – of whom 1.04
million are women and 351,540 are youth) feed directly into Outcome 3 (Increased Resilience to Climate Risks) of the
recently approved CPF for Pakistan. These are fully aligned with the corporate scorecard indicators – this operation feeds
directly into the WBG scorecard indicator Millions of Beneficiaries with Enhanced Resilience to Climate Risks (through two
sub-indicators).  The theory of change for operation (details below) has been developed with this overarching outcome
underpinning it.

4 The GSFF supports poor and vulnerable countries and people with increased access to financial protection against climate risks.
5 For PDO indicator (a) and (c) – to align with corporate scorecard methodology, the number of borrowers will be multiplied by the average household size in Pakistan
(6.3 – as per 2023 census) as all household members benefit from the outcome of the intervention (not limited to the individual borrower). The numbers will be
gender disaggregated and the youth segment of beneficiaries will be calculated as 18.6% of total beneficiaries (as census shows that is size of the population between
the ages of 15-24)

Pakistan: Resilient and Accessible Microfinance (RAM) Project (P181037)

Page 6

Figure 4 – Theory of Change

C. Project Beneficiaries
17.
The CRF provides support both pre and post a flood disaster event. The CRF’s provision of pre-disaster liquidity
for climate smart agriculture directly benefits small agricultural business owners, women, and employment in rural
communities. Microfinance borrowers in Pakistan have historically been drawn from marginalized segments including
small business owners and MSMEs, farmers, women and rural households without access to conventional finance. The
provision of financing for climate-smart agricultural resilience and adaptation among the microfinance borrower’s
population enables broader coverage of climate-smart technologies and practices among agricultural, rural enterprises
and their stakeholders. Promoting agricultural productivity and safeguarding livelihoods in rural communities is critical
for growth in rural areas going forward.

18.
Safeguarding jobs and employment in the agricultural sector will create positive spillovers to other sectors
(particularly in agri-business).  Approximately 37.5 percent of all households with agricultural income also earn income
in non-agricultural activities.  Greater economic productivity and security in the agricultural sector supports regional
economic stability by facilitating expansion in agriculture-adjacent activities such as processing, storage, transport, and
regional marketing.

19.
The CRF’s post-disaster support directly benefits those most affected by qualifying floods, in particular women
and economically fragile segments. Unlike conventional loans in Pakistan, microfinance loans are frequently not
collateral-backed which has fostered greater access among women (who are collateral constrained). Women account for
45 percent of all microfinance borrowers and microfinance has grown even among economically vulnerable populations.

Pakistan: Resilient and Accessible Microfinance (RAM) Project (P181037)

Page 7

This client base has fewer individual or collective resources to rebuild/recover after a climate-related disaster. However,
even though portfolio data shows women tend to be better borrowers, the number of female borrowers (as well as their
share of total lending) is particularly low where rates of monetary poverty, non-monetary deprivation, and time poverty
rates among women and girls are high.  As such, those women who may need microfinance most are unable to access it
(or access enough of it) post climate disaster.  The post-disaster CRF support includes incentives to ensure access to
finance among women borrowers and households with fewer resources to rebuild is maintained at, and if possible
enhanced above, pre-disaster levels.

20.
The proposed interventions will also directly support MFPs and the sector at large, in particular in the event
of a qualifying climatic shock. The pre-disaster innovative agriculture liquidity will build the credit worthiness of
borrowers and thus improve portfolio performance of MFPs.  The post-disaster interventions proposed will unlock
liquidity for the sector at a time when it is most strapped for liquidity, enabling not only continued lending but also
staving off potential balance sheet pressures and capital depletion.

D. Project Components

21.
The project supports the adaptation, resilience and recovery of MFPs and its borrowers, by creating buffers
against growing flood risks, while concurrently enhancing access to microcredit.  The project will achieve this through
the establishment, operationalization and capitalization of a CRF. During project implementation, as part of
implementation support, catastrophe modelling to include risks of extreme heat and droughts will also be undertaken;
however, as is, the CRF will only be capitalized to meet the contingent financing needs of MFPs post flood events.
Enhancing the scope of climate risks covered by the CRF may require additional capital.  Any additional financing, however,
will be subject to the approval of WB/IFC Board and concurrence of the GoP.6
Component 1: Climate Risk Fund (US$125 million, which includes a US$23 million GSFF grant)

22.
The CRF will be used to fund: (i) Innovative Agricultural Liquidity loans; (ii) Contingent Liquidity Facility loans;
and (iii) payment of parametric insurance premiums.

23.
  The CRF will be established and capitalized as a Trust owned by the GoP and managed by the SBP as the
Trustee.  The CRF will be funded with an initial capitalization of US$125 million equivalent in PKR, out of which US$23
million is a grant from the GSFF. The funding will be injected into the CRF at the start of the project. The CRF will serve the
overarching objective of enhancing the resilience of MFPs and their borrowers, by supporting climate adaptation and
recovery, in addition to enhancing access to finance. It will do so by providing liquidity to MFPs for on-lending to eligible
micro-borrowers. The CRF will provide liquidity both pre and post a “qualifying” flooding event through two tailored
products. Qualifying flood events are those that are deemed a “disaster” by the government or events that lead to a
triggering of predefined triggers, grounded in risk modelling (details below). The CRF has multifold objectives, namely, to:
a) reverse disintermediation away from locations and sectors that are deemed more prone to flood risks through a
contingent liquidity facility which will be deployed after a qualifying flooding event;
b) preserve the balance sheets of MFPs after the occurrence of a qualifying flood through the deployment of liquidity
which that will mitigate the impact on the asset quality of MFPs (e.g. NPLs will not see a spike post event) as they
will have the contingent liquidity to restructure existing loans, restructure and top-up existing loans, or generate
fresh ‘recovery loans’;

6 Additionally, going forward, the project may finance the establishment, operationalization and capitalization of the risk sharing facility in
collaboration with IFC through an additional financing.

Pakistan: Resilient and Accessible Microfinance (RAM) Project (P181037)

Page 8

c) enhance climate adaptation, resilience and productivity in the agricultural sector through the ‘business as usual’
Innovative Agricultural Liquidity (IAL) product;
d) transfer the economic costs of an extreme flood event outside of Pakistan through the risk-based deployment of
international reinsurance.

24.
The CRF will achieve its objectives by offering a suite of two products. The products offer different types of
support. The first, which will entail immediate disbursement of liquidity post operationalization of the CRF, will be noncontingent and will deploy liquidity immediately post operationalization of the CRF. The second product will be a
contingent product that will be accessed in the event of a qualifying flooding event and, will only be deployed post a
climatic event.

Product 1: Pre-Climate Event Innovative Agricultural Liquidity – US$20 million
25.
The CRF will enhance adaptation and resilience of MFPs and their borrowers prior to a flood event through the
provision of liquidity in PKR to MFPs for the origination of climate smart agriculture loans. Designed as a pilot, climate
smart agriculture loans will be developed by bundling agriculture loans of MFPs with advisory support from ATCs. ATCs
are companies that use technology in agriculture, horticulture, and aquaculture with the aim of improving borrower-level
yield, efficiency, and profitability. By bundling loans with ATC support, the IAL product will not only boost the volume of
agriculture finance through the microfinance sector, but it will also boost productivity, sustainability, adaptation and
resilience of borrowers, and consequently of MFPs, to climate risks. This intervention is designed for its demonstration
effect, as the value proposition is proven (to borrowers and lenders), it will also enable MFPs to tap into domestic private
capital to scale up the product offering. The product builds on lessons learned from a pilot initiative recently undertaken
by the PMIC whereby the liquidy provided to MFPs for agriculture was coupled with farm level, precision agriculture
advisory services. This included loans to support uptake of drought resistant seed varieties, along with efforts to support
more water efficient irrigation methods and crop substituition where needed. The results of the pilot, and other similar
initiatives, have revealed large increases in farmer income and farm yields.7 The eligiblity criteria for MFPs to access the
IAL, along with the terms and conditions of the facility, will be detailed in the Project Operating Manual (POM).

26.
A panel of ATCs will be selected to provide agritech services in partnership with MFPs through an Agriculture
Finance Innovation Challenge (AFIC) which will be run by the SBP as a trustee. The purpose of the AFIC is to identify five
to six ATCs that demonstrate innovative agri-tech services that can be bundled with loans to boost farm-level yield,
efficiency and profitability. MFPs that avail the IAL product will have to partner with at least one ATC selected under the
AFIC.  This will enable the winning ATCs firms to develop innovative solutions as part of micro-loans and will build the
capacity of MFPs and borrowers to better understand climate smart agriculture practices. The AFIC will be executed by
the SBP, in partnership with relevant stakeholders, using its own resources. As such, all the resources allocated for this
product under the CRF will be earmarked for the provision of liquidity to MFPs.  The mechanisms for implementing the
AFIC along with the criteria for selecting the panel of ATCs will be detailed in the POM.

27.
Financing allocated for this product will be merged with financing available for Product 2 at project close. The
product is meant to serve as a pilot to: (i) better understand the impact of bundled financing at the borrower level (i.e.
increase in yield, increase in productivity etc.); (ii) showcase to the sector—both borrowers and MFPs –the potential
offered by ATCs; and (iii) create a market for climate smart agriculture in Pakistan. These objectives of the IAL will be
achieved through a demonstration effect during project implementation, once achieved, the financing allocated to this
product will be included back in the pool of financing available under the CRF for post climate event liquidity.

7 Pakistan Microfinance Investment Company Limited. 2023. Outcome Assessment Report 2023

Pakistan: Resilient and Accessible Microfinance (RAM) Project (P181037)

Page 9

Product 2: Post-Climate Event Contingent Liquidity (Contingent Liquidity Facility) – US$105 million
28.
The funding for this product under the CRF will only be passed onto MFPs in PKR after qualifying floods for use
in the generation of ‘recovery’ loans. Contingent liquidity will be provided to eligible MFPs through a product called
‘Contingent Liquidity Facility’ (CLF). The CLF is a contingent line of credit - only MFPs that have active portfolios in the
‘qualifying’ flood impacted   areas will be eligible to access liquidity available under the CRF, and liquidity extended by the
CRF would only be eligible for deployment in areas impacted by floods. The level of liquidity provided to eligible MFPs will,
among other criteria, be determined by the impact of floods on the portfolios of the MFPs. The information flow, data
sources and eligibility criteria and key conditions for access to the CRF post flood event will be laid out in granular detail
in the POM. MFPs can use the CRF products to restructure existing loans of their borrowers, restructure and top up existing
loans, and/or give new ‘recovery’ loans to their current and/or new borrowers. The liquidity will be passed onto MFPs,
and end borrowers, on market terms, barring instances where the liquidity is to be used for generation of recovery loans
for women.8 The liquidity provided to MFPs and the loans generated using it will provide a buffer at a time when
livelihoods are temporarily impacted by the climate event. This level of support serves to protect the borrowers by giving
them some ‘breathing space’ while also protecting the asset quality of MFPs.

29.
In the initial phase of the CRF operationalization, support to the sector under the CLF product will only be
provided to cover qualifying floods. The definition of parametric indices, triggers, and a post event loss calculation (PELC)
method, as part of the risk modelling, will be central to enabling objectives and transparent criteria in determining the
amount of funding to be released by the CRF through this product.  All the criteria, modalities and data sources that will
serve to ‘trigger’ the CRF to release the post climate shock products will be detailed in the POM.  Additionally, over the
life of the project and as part of implementation support to the CRF, analytical modelling work will be undertaken to
eventually enable the CRF to also cover other climatic risks such as extreme heat and drought. Expansion of coverage to
additional climate risks will require adequate risk modelling and data to design and implement the financial instruments
for these risks. Furthermore, consideration will need to be given to the sustainability and level of financial support that
can be provided by the CRF if the scope of coverage is expanded without increasing the size of the CRF.

30.
An international parametric insurance backstop will inject additional capital into the CRF to increase the pool
of liquidity available for deployment through the CLF product after extreme flood events.  Layered risk modelling (see
Figure 4) will determine the thresholds for triggering the insurance backstop payout. The backstop will serve several
objectives. First, it will move parts of the economic costs of an extreme climate event outside of Pakistan through the riskbased deployment of international reinsurance. Second, it will top up the resources available in the CRF for the CLF
product at a time when the sector at large, including MFPs and their borrowers, would be in distress and therefore in
need for significant funding support. Third, it will support the long-term sustainability of the CRF while mobilizing
significant private capital. The premium associated with securing the parametric insurance backstop will be paid for
through the GSFF grant and investment proceeds generated by CRF capital in US dollars. Further grant financing, if
secured, may also be used to pay for the insurance premium. It is also pertinent to note that the decision to secure
parametric insurance for the CRF will be undertaken by the CRF Oversight Committee on an annual basis, financial
modelling on the sustainability of the CRF will be undertaken annually to inform this decision making.

8 Market terms here in the context of lending from the CRF to MFPs refers to the 6-month Karachi Interbank Offer Rate (KIBOR),
which is the rate at which the financial sector at large currently lends to the microfinance sector. Market terms in the context of
lending from MFPs to borrowers refers to the fact that the rates MFPs charge to end borrowers will be market determined.

Pakistan: Resilient and Accessible Microfinance (RAM) Project (P181037)

Page 10

Figure 5: Risk Layering of CRF

31.
The activation of the post climate event products of the CRF and the payout from the parametric insurance
backstop will be subject to two independent triggers. These triggers will be independently verifiable and empirically
grounded based on rigorous risk layering modelling. The SBP as the executing agency of the CRF will have access to all key
data points required to make informed decisions.  Much of the data required to evaluate whether a trigger has been hit
or not will be provided by third party service providers (e.g., credit rating agencies, flood risk modelling firms) to the CRF.
All details of sources of data and thresholds for the two triggers will be detailed in the POM. The two triggers are:
a) Trigger that activates the CRF – this trigger determines when a flooding event is significant enough to warrant the
‘triggering’ of support through CLF for MFPs. The thresholds which will determine whether support is provided by
the CRF to MFPs after a climate event include:
i.
The government declares an emergency or calamity affected area in a particular district; or
ii.
If the government does not declare an emergency due to a specific flood but a predetermined threshold
of the portfolio of a particular MFP is impacted by the floods (showing a very localized flooding event that
disproportionately impacts an MFP which has a geographically concentrated portfolio).
b) Trigger to unlock payout insurance backstop – this trigger determines when the CRF qualifies for payout from the
insurance backstop.
i.
Predetermined threshold of the portfolio of the entire microfinance sector is impacted by a flood.

32.
The CRF has been designed considering the lessons learned from recent floods and aims to bolster the risk
finance landscape of the country, while being anchored in the principles of sustainability. Financial preparedness for
crises is critical for countries such as Pakistan where disaster losses amount to a large percentage of GDP and the cost of
mobilizing funds to meet post-disaster needs is high. Despite the importance of financial preparedness through the
deployment of diversified risk instruments such as contingent lines of credit, sovereign risk transfers, and risk pooling
facilities, the existing risk finance eco-system in Pakistan remains sparse and is dominated by the government, while
imposing a significant fiscal cost. The CRF will buttress the risk finance landscape by employing a risk layering approach to
the distribution of risk between the private sector, the government and international markets. In instances of ‘small’ or
‘medium’ shocks, MFPs will retain risk and therefore no support would be provided by the CRF; the risk will be borne by
the private sector. The CRF will only provide support to the sector in instances the flooding event is classified as ‘large’ or
‘extreme’. When the event is classified as ‘extreme’, the insurance backstop will inject additional capital into the CRF to
enhance the funding pool available to support the microfinance sector (i.e. part of the risk will be transferred to the

Pakistan: Resilient and Accessible Microfinance (RAM) Project (P181037)

Page 11

international reinsurance markets). The design of the CRF builds on the lessons learned from the 2022 floods where cash
grants were given to flood effected households, often regardless of actual needs and social status, and at great fiscal cost.

33.
Going forward the project may entail an additional financing for the establishment, capitalization, and
operationalization of a guarantee facility, jointly with IFC, to derisk the sector. This is envisaged in the 10-year vision for
the sector (developed by the WBG in collaboration with key stakeholders) and would be subject to approval by WB
management and concurrence of the GoP. Derisking through guarantees will both unlock liquidity for those MFPs that are
liquidity constrained and provide capital relief, to MFBs, whose capital erosion limits their ability to scale up lending.  The
facility, which may be established through an additional financing of the project, will complement the new facility being
launched by the ADB and is envisioned to enhance liquidity and capital optimization of the sector.

E. Role of Partners

34.
The RAM Project is embedded in a 10-year vision for the microfinance sector and builds on
complementarities and synergies with o-going broad-based support to increase the outreach and resilience of the
sector.
Table 2: Partner
Involvement in RAM Name
of Partner
Nature of Involvement /Description
Asian Development Bank
(ADB)

Women Inclusive Finance Sector Development Program (WIF):
The WIF program entails both policy reforms in support of greater access to
microfinance, and liquidity support through a line of credit for the origination of
microfinance loans specifically for women. The program is complementary to RAM
given its focus on enhancing women’s access to finance through the microfinance
sector. The initiative also entails the establishment of a guarantee to unlock liquidity to
reduce the gender gap in access to microfinance – this is being developed such that
there is clear market segmentation so that the proposed WBG guarantee structure
compliments (rather than competes) with the ADB structure.
Climate and Disaster Resilience Enhancement Program (CEDREP):
CEDREP includes a contingent disaster financing option for disaster response and
recovery. The program is complementary to RAM given its contingent nature;
however, it is also distinct in that it doesn’t explicitly entail contingent financing routed
through the microfinance sector but rather provides budgetary support to the GoP in
the event of a climate shock.
Foreign, Commonwealth
& Development Office
(FCDO)
Enterprise and Assets Growth Program (EAGR):
Under EAGR, the FCDO supports Karandaaz with one of the stated outputs being to
sustained/enhanced flow of funds for microfinance (through the PMIC). The program is
complementary to RAM.
Deutsche Gesellschaft
für Internationale
Zusammenarbeit (GIZ)
Innovative climate risk financing solutions in Pakistan:
The GIZ project supports the resilience of agricultural MSMEs against climate change,
through developing climate risk financing mechanisms, building capacity of MSMEs,
and strengthening supply chain of MSMEs in agriculture. The program is

Pakistan: Resilient and Accessible Microfinance (RAM) Project (P181037)

Page 12

complementary to RAM and is in particular synergistic with the pre-climate instrument
which entails support to farmers centered on enhancing resilience to climate shocks.

F. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design
35.
The project has factored in lessons learned from previous and ongoing financial sector operational work in
Pakistan. This includes the GoP’s National Financial Inclusion Strategy (prepared under a Reimbursable Advisory Service
in 2015) and FIIP, which includes liquidity for small and medium‐sized enterprises to be supported through the
microfinance sector. The design of the credit line in the project follows international best practices and the WBs
operational policy guidelines on financial intermediary financing. It also incorporates the conclusions of the 2006
Independent Evaluation Group evaluation of credit lines regarding issues detected from past experience. The credit line
will thus operate on market‐based principles, catalyzing private sector financing. The credit line in this particular instance,
will also be supporting the origination of microloans which will be paired with on-farm advisory support to ensure
maximum impact, gains in productivity, and hence long-term sustainability.

36.
The project design has also benefited from the Bank’s global experience supporting sovereigns on microfinance.
The experience shows that support needs to be client centric and holistic. This is reflected in the project design by building
in flexibility to mobilize support through financial products to suit the requirements of low-income clients to ensure uptake
and sustainability. The CRF will channel support to borrowers using instruments that will be determined based on the
nature and scale of the climatic event. Support will also be holistic considering experience that financial services alone
might not be sufficient to address the multifaceted needs of clients. Agriculture finance to be supported through credit
lines under the project, as a result, will consequently be paired with advisory support to enhance the impact of financing.

37.
The project design takes on board cross-cutting lessons and experience centered on the need for active risk
management for sustainability and technology adoption for impact of project interventions. The project design and its
eventual implementation will benefit from extensive risk modelling undertaken to determine the climate risk profiles of
all the tehsils in Pakistan.9 This risk modelling will be the basis for the operations of the CRF, in particular pricing and
triggers, in addition to supporting the determination of the premium and triggers for the insurance backstop. Advisory
support, which will be paired with agriculture financing will similarly leverage technology, big data processing and the
footprint of agri-tech companies to maximize the impact of financing.

III. PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION

A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
38.
The CRF will be established as a Trust owned by the GoP and executed by the SBP on a pro-bono basis as a
Trustee appointed by the GoP. The SBP has been selected as an execution implementation partner after extensive due
diligence and consultations that also considered alternative implementation modalities, including private sector led
management options. Among other reasons, the SBP is ideally suited to be an execution partner on the proposed project
given:
a) Its existing role in the implementation of the Financial Inclusion and Infrastructure Project (P159428), which has
a credit line for small and medium‐sized enterprises to be supported through the microfinance sector.  This has

9 A tehsil is a local unit of administrative division in Pakistan. It is a subdistrict of the area within a district including the designated populated place
that serves as its administrative center, with possible additional towns, and usually a number of villages.

Pakistan: Resilient and Accessible Microfinance (RAM) Project (P181037)

Page 13

significantly bolstered the capacity of the SBP to administer programs akin to RAM that seek to support the
microfinance sector.
b) As the regulator of MFBs and credit bureaus, the SBP also has access to granular data to inform the day-to-day
decision making of the CRF and the support to be extended under it.
c) It has a fully staffed and well capacitated department centered on microfinance which will enable rapid
operationalization of the CRF, over and above its experience working with the WB on projects geared towards
supporting the microfinance sector and its borrowers.
d) It will ensure sustainability of the CRF given that, as a regulator of the sector, the SBP has direct access to collateral
placed by MFBs with it.
e) It manages numerous lines of credit and guarantee facilities on behalf of the GoP, including close to US$200
million for liquidity support to microfinance providers funded by the WB and ADB. The SBP undertakes all the due
diligence, credit assessments and policy formulation for all these facilities.
f) Close collaboration and working relationships with sectoral bodies, such as the PMIC.

39.
The use of the Trust structure has been agreed with relevant stakeholders (Ministry of Finance, SBP and SECP).
The Trust modality has been informed by lessons learned from the Pakistan Housing Finance Project (P162095) currently
under implementation, wherein a Trust structure was used to ring fence public sector assets for deployment under agreed
terms with a government appointed Trustee.  The benefits of using the Trust are multifold, including:
a) It creates a ring-fenced, autonomous structure
b) Minimal set-up and implementation costs
c) It creates a structure that can crowd in additional funds (from government, donors, etc.) to help mitigate impact
of climate risks to the financial sector.

Figure 6. Overview of implementation arrangements for CRF

Pakistan: Resilient and Accessible Microfinance (RAM) Project (P181037)

Page 14

40.
Implementation will be governed by a robust governance structure. This would entail the constitution of an
Oversight Committee and a Working Committee; this is the standard and preferred implementation structure within the
SBP. While the Oversight Committee will be tasked with strategic decisions, such as making a determination on whether
to secure parametric insurance for the CRF,  deciding  on deployment of CRF resources etc., the Working Committee will
be responsible for the day to day operations of the CRF, including decisions related to allocation of funding by MFP,
ensuring CRF is deployed as and when needed post climate event as envisaged in project design. The precise terms of
reference of the two committees along with their memberships will be defined in the POM.

B. Results Monitoring, Evaluation, and Verification Arrangements
41.
The MoF through the SBP will be responsible for monitoring the results and activities under the project using
its existing monitoring and evaluation (M&E) systems. The SBP will be responsible for tracking progress against result
indicators. Concurrently, the SBP will work to further strengthen its M&E including the quality of data collection, and the
security and operational soundness of the Management Information System (MIS).

42.
The MoF through the SBP will use different sources of information for M&E. These include: (i) bi-annual reviews
to analyze results and progress on agreed outcomes and performance indicators; (ii) financial audit; (iii) the MIS; (iv)
beneficiary satisfaction surveys; (v) quarterly program progress reports; and (vii) a Mid-Term Review Report

C. Disbursement Arrangements
43.
Disbursement to the project will be based on Interim Financial Reports (IFRs). The recipient will establish a
pooled account – with segregated child accounts, one for the GSFF grant and one for the loan. The Funds will be
frontloaded to pooled account for capitalization of the CRF Trust.

IV. PROJECT APPRAISAL SUMMARY

A. Technical, Economic and Financial Analysis (if applicable)
44.
The technical, financial and economic analysis of the project can be disaggregated by expected impact at the
borrower and at the MFP level. While hard to quantify given the heterogeneity of scenarios, heterogeneity in borrower
and provider profiles, path dependency and the contingent nature of financing, literature suggests that support to be
provided by the CRF will lead to significant economic and financial benefits and positive externalities through indirect
channels. The case for the CRF and its expected positive economic and financial impact is reflected most concretely in a
report by the Consultative Group to Assist the Poor (CGAP). The report on climate change and financial inclusion provides
a detailed look at the complex relationship between climate resilience, financial inclusion, and financial stability.10
According to report, climate events create both direct and indirect challenges for low-income communities by damaging
essential assets, reducing agricultural productivity, and threatening livelihoods. This increased risk not only impacts clients
but also the financial institutions that serve them, making it harder to extend financial services to the most climatevulnerable populations. Consequently, the report emphasizes the need for a proactive approach to climate adaptation
within inclusive finance to avoid exacerbating financial exclusion, akin to the CRF approach. Literature published by the
United Nations and WB in recent years echoes the findings of the CGAP. The United Nations Capital Development Fund in

10 Zetterli, Peter. November 2023. “Climate Adaptation, Resilience, and Financial Inclusion: A New Agenda.” Focus Note, Consultative Group to
Assist the Poor

Pakistan: Resilient and Accessible Microfinance (RAM) Project (P181037)

Page 15

a report published in 2019 covers the critical role of liquidity support in ensuring that MFPs can continue operating in
post-climate event situations, with a particular focus on low-income and vulnerable populations.11 While focused more
broadly on financial protection, a WB report addresses the importance of liquidity mechanisms, including insurance and
emergency credit, for financial institutions operating in disaster-prone areas, which includes MFPs.12

45.
The financial and economic impact at the MFP level will stem from enhanced stability and risk mitigation. The
CRF will allow MFPs to continue operating even when they face sudden, climate-induced financial pressures, such as an
increase in loan defaults or delays in repayment. By providing short-term funds, the CRF will prevent cash flow issues that
could otherwise lead to the insolvency of MFPs or force them to pull back from lending. The CRF will also forestall NPLs,
which have tended to spike following major climate calamities in Pakistan, ensuring capital conservation and therefore
stability, while preserving the ability of the MFPs to continue lending. The CRF mitigates risks by acting as a buffer against
unanticipated demand for capital, especially in areas frequently affected by climate events. This buffer can encourage
MFPs to offer products like climate insurance or extend terms that would otherwise be too risky, knowing that they have
backup capital access if a major event occurs. In addition, with the additional security provided by the CRF, MFPs will
become more attractive to the financial sector at large, which has been cautious about climate-related risks. Stable access
to post event funding will help MFPs demonstrate resilience to potential funders, fostering confidence and promoting
long-term investment in the sector.

46.
The impact at the borrower level stems predominantly from safeguarding livelihoods and promoting resilience.
Microfinance clients, often low-income individuals and small businesses, depend on continued access to credit,
particularly after climate events when they need resources for rebuilding. The CRF will allow MFPs to continue disbursing
loans and supporting affected communities, contributing to quicker economic recovery and reducing the likelihood of
clients falling into deeper poverty. It will also enable existing borrowers of the sector to stay current on their obligations
to the sector. In addition, Product 1: IAL, will also foster productivity and yield growth, contributing to enhanced resilience
and increasing farmer incomes.

47.
Maximizing Finance for Development. The project reflects the WBs Maximizing Finance for Development
(MFD)strategy by promoting MFD enabling and private capital enabling (PCE) interventions. The project will be MFD
enabling because the CRF allows continued lending to bankable borrowers in instances of a large or extreme flooding
event. Similarly, the project augments funds available by enabling private capital for disaster response, through
parametric insurance - a key design feature of the CRF. Based on preliminary modelling, the CRF is expected to budget
US$26 million for insurance premiums over the five-year project period, of which US$13 million would be from the GSFF
grant and US$13 million from CRF investment income. The final amounts are subject to an annual decision by the CRF
Oversight Committee on insurance purchases, following technical and financial review of the insurance product and
review of the CRF’s financial position each year.  Based on international experience, it is estimated that US$1 of insurance
premium provides US$10 of coverage which represents US$260 million capital at risk from the private (re)insurers
(estimated PCE). The CRF follows a risk layering approach whereby its own capital ensures resources are available for
emergency lending following medium to large shocks, limiting the total risk to be covered by private insurance to extreme
events, hence making it more affordable (making disasters insurable). The project will monitor the purchase of insurance
to determine PCE. The project is also expected to be private capital enabling because the de-risking offered by the CRF
through liquidity will enable MFPs to secure funding from the financial sector at large in Pakistan. While hard to quantify,
de-risking, and its consequential impact on NPLs and stability, will incentivize lenders to the microfinance sector to
continue lending even in the event of a significant flooding event.  Additionally, the project lays the building blocks

11 LoCAL Facility and United Nations Capital Development Fund. 2020. LoCAL Annual Report 2019: Accelerating Local Climate Action
12 World Bank Group. 2014. Financial Protection Against Natural Disasters: An Operational Framework for Disaster Risk Financing and Insurance.
Washington, DC: World Bank Group.

Pakistan: Resilient and Accessible Microfinance (RAM) Project (P181037)

Page 16

(including developing the implementation arrangements) for the proposed phase 2 of the operation which will entail the
establishment a guarantee structure jointly with IFC – this will leverage IDA resources 6 times by deploying IFC’s balance
sheet for the second loss. Phase 2 is subject to agreement with GoP.

48.
Paris Alignment. The operation aligns with Paris Agreement objectives for both mitigation and adaptation and is
in line with Pakistan’s 2021 Updated Nationally Determined Contributions and its 2023 National Adaptation Plan (NAP).
The CRF will be governed by a Trust framework. To ensure that lending and any associated activities are aligned with the
Paris Agreement, negative lists will be provided to both the Trust and to MFPs that avail of CRF liquidity. Further, lending
activities that stem from the CRF are expected to promote mitigation ex ante to climate shocks via the IAL, and to support
adaptation through the contingent CRF liquidity post-flood. Under the IAL, MFPs will be expected to bundle lending with
ATCs offering to build borrower resilience using climate smart technology (in line with the NAP), or by increasing yields
and lowering risks. The CRF liquidity following a flood will be contingent on targeting affected areas to promote recovery
and will directly support climate adaptation of MFPs and their borrowers.

49.
Gender. In the aftermath of disasters, women face significant barriers to accessing social welfare, aid, and
financial support, largely due to structural gender inequalities, mobility constraints, limited asset ownership,13 and lower
financial literacy.  Their ability to recover depends on access to coping mechanisms that mitigate income shocks, yet
evidence shows post-disaster assistance often fails to reach women equitably.14  This disparity extends to disaster risk
financing, where women’s access to financial recovery tools—including insurance—lags behind men’s.15  Restricted access
to social protection further compounds their vulnerability, underscoring the need for more inclusive financial recovery
mechanisms. Microfinancing is often a critical alternative for those excluded from the formal financial system, yet only
45% of women can access microfinance loans. Given that post-disaster settings further restrict women’s access to social
aid and financing, this project prioritizes directing more loans to women to help close the gap and enhance their economic
resilience. To address these gender-based disparities, the project will ensure that more women will benefit from disaster
risk financing. The project will do so by a) ensuring that at least 55% of the beneficiaries of MFPs benefitting from CRF
liquidity are women, with the safeguard that the MFPs will be required to pay a higher borrowing cost to the CRF in
instances there is deviation from the agreed allocation;  b) helping overcome the biases of loan officers16 by training and
awareness raising implemented by SBP; and c) enhancing women’s understanding of post-disaster risk products through
targeted financial literacy programs focused on financial planning, loan application processes and management, and safe
borrowing practices, ensuring that they are equipped with the knowledge to navigate financial systems. The project will
ensure that women beneficiaries have expedited and equal access to financial assistance for recovery.  The narrowing of
the gender gap will be tracked via People covered by disaster risk finance and insurance - Female.

50.
Citizen Engagement (CE). CE will form an integral part of the project to enable effective two-way interactions with
citizens, including community and beneficiary consultations at all stages of the project, from design to implementation.
The main target group of this activity will be communities impacted by floods and also rural communities given the
geographical distribution of the loan portfolios of the microfinance sector. The CE mechanisms will help design loan
extension services based on the needs of beneficiaries, enabling all stakeholders to make informed decisions about public
resource allocations. CE will include: (i) the establishment of a real-time interaction platform between beneficiaries, MFPs,

13 Pakistan Floods 2022 Post-Disaster Needs Assessment. https://thedocs.worldbank.org/en/doc/4a0114eb7d1cecbbbf2f65c5ce0789db0310012022/original/Pakistan-Floods-2022-PDNA-Main-Report.pdf
14 How to Identify Gender Gaps in Disaster Risk Management Projects. Guidance Note.
https://documents1.worldbank.org/curated/en/099182502092349029/pdf/P1508350687fce07108f1507064a93cedad.pdf
15 Gender Equality and Women’s Empowerment in Disaster Recovery. https://www.gfdrr.org/sites/default/files/publication/gender-equalitydisaster-recovery.PDF
16 Uncovering the Hidden Cost of Gender Biases in Lending to Women. https://idbinvest.org/en/blog/gender/uncovering-hidden-cost-genderbiases-lending-women

Pakistan: Resilient and Accessible Microfinance (RAM) Project (P181037)

Page 17

and the GoP; (ii) the creation of community participatory monitoring through social audits and other tools; and (iii) the
establishment of a functional grievance redress mechanism, exploring ways to integrate this fully into the project. The
Stakeholder Engagement Plan to be prepared under ESS10 will include a mapping of all stakeholders and detailed plans
for CE during the lifetime of the project.
B. Fiduciary
51.
Disbursement to the project will be report based. Each IFR will cover one semester and will be submitted to the
Bank within 45 days from the end of each semester.  The recipient will establish a pooled account – with segregated child
accounts, one for the GSFF grant and one for the loan. The Funds will be frontloaded to pooled account for capitalization
of the CRF Trust. The IFR reports will cover transactions of the pooled and child accounts of Trust. The SBP will maintain
separate books of accounts for tracking project related transactions.

52.
The GoP budget rules and procedures will apply. The SBP has experience in managing the budgeting aspects for
operations such as this project. Annual project allocation will be included in the national budget.

53.
The internal audit department will be responsible for the internal audit of the project and will submit internal
audit reports to the Bank on semester basis. The project’s annual external audit will be carried out by the Auditor General
of Pakistan, and they will submit the annual audited project’s financial statements to the Bank within six months after the
end of the fiscal year.
C. Environmental, Social and Legal Operational Policies

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padlegalpolicy#doctemplate
Legal Operational Policies
Triggered?
Projects on International Waterways OP 7.50
No
Projects in Disputed Area OP 7.60
No

54.
The project is likely to have a footprint all across the country. Most of the loans are expected to be small with
insignificant impacts on humans and environment. The project environmental risks and impacts are expected to occur as
a result of cumulative impacts of clustering of loans in geographical areas (such as in the cotton belt) where project
interventions may increase use of fertilizers, pesticides and other chemicals. Similar impacts are also expected in cities
and towns where SMEs clusters are causing environmental degradation due to worsening of ambient air quality (especially
particulate matter, SOx and NOx), polluting surface waterbodies and soil contamination. It may also increase exposure of
workers to pesticides and chemical and can increase secondary particulate matter. However, the incidence of cumulative
impacts is expected to be localized and exposure levels are not expected to cross threshold limits. Hence, such impacts
can be easily mitigated in a predictable manner by using available technologies and techniques. The Environmental and
Social Commitment Plan (ESCP) has been developed with these risks in mind and has been disclosed in country and on the
Bank’s external website17. Furthermore, the project will relying on Environmental and Social Management Systems of SBP

17 Dated January 13th - Disclosure date February 20th, 2025 - https://www.sbp.org.pk/Finc/pdf/Environmental-Social-CommitmentPlan.pdf;https://documents.worldbank.org/en/publication/documents-reports/documentdetail/099021925162040693

Pakistan: Resilient and Accessible Microfinance (RAM) Project(P181037)

Page 20

  ANNEX 1. RESULTS FRAMEWORK

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padannexresultframework#doctemplate

PDO Indicators by PDO Outcomes
Baseline
Period 1
Period 2
Period 3
Period 4
Closing Period
Enhanced Access to Microcredit
People benefiting from increased resilience of livelihoods, jobs or firms (Number of people) CRI
Mar/2025
Mar/2026
Mar/2027
Mar/2028
Mar/2029
Mar/2030
63,000
126,000
189,000
252,000
315,000
➢People benefiting from increased resilience of livelihoods, jobs or firms - Female (Number of people) CRI
Mar/2025
Mar/2026
Mar/2027
Mar/2028
Mar/2029
Mar/2030
34,650
69,300
103,950
138,600
173,250
➢People benefiting from increased resilience of livelihoods, jobs or firms - Youth (Number of people) CRI
Mar/2025
Mar/2026
Mar/2027
Mar/2028
Mar/2029
Mar/2030
11,529
23,436
35,154
46,872
58,590
Enhanced Resilience of the Microfinance Sector and its Borrowers
People covered by disaster risk finance and insurance (Number of people) CRI
Mar/2025
Mar/2026
Mar/2027
Mar/2028
Mar/2029
Mar/2030
315,000
630,000
945,000
1,260,000
1,575,000
➢People covered by disaster risk finance and insurance - Female (Number of people) CRI
Mar/2025
Mar/2026
Mar/2027
Mar/2028
Mar/2029
Mar/2030
173,250
346,500
519,750
693,000
866,250
➢People covered by disaster risk finance and insurance - Youth (Number of people) CRI
Mar/2025
Mar/2026
Mar/2027
Mar/2028
Mar/2029
Mar/2030
58,590
117,180
175,770
234,360
292,950
CRF liquidity which is deployed to originate loans within 60 days of qualifying floods (Percentage)
Mar/2025
Mar/2026
Mar/2027
Mar/2028
Mar/2029
Mar/2030
Intermediate Indicators by Components

Pakistan: Resilient and Accessible Microfinance (RAM) Project(P181037)

Page 21

Baseline
Period 1
Period 2
Period 3
Period 4
Closing Period
Climate Risk Fund
MFPs in flood impacted areas benefiting from CRF liquidity support (Percentage)
Mar/2025
Mar/2026
Mar/2027
Mar/2028
Mar/2029
Mar/2030
Agriculture Finance Innovation Challenge has been run to select Agriculture Technology Companies (Yes/No)
Mar/2025
Mar/2026
Mar/2027
Mar/2028
Mar/2029
Mar/2030
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Innovative agricultural lending products which have been designed (Number)
Mar/2025
Mar/2026
Mar/2027
Mar/2028
Mar/2029
Mar/2030
MFPs given liquidity through the Innovative Agriculture Liquidity product of CRF (Number)
Mar/2025
Mar/2026
Mar/2027
Mar/2028
Mar/2029
Mar/2030
Beneficiaries reporting satisfaction with project activities in periodic beneficiary feedback surveys (Percentage)
Mar/2025
Mar/2026
Mar/2027
Mar/2028
Mar/2029
Mar/2030

Pakistan: Resilient and Accessible Microfinance (RAM) Project (P181037)

Page 22

Monitoring & Evaluation Plan: PDO Indicators by PDO Outcomes
Enhanced borrower resilience and access to microcredit
People benefitting from increased resilience of livelihoods, jobs or firms (number)
Description
Number of people who benefit from the ATC bundled loan (pre-climate event) – these loans
are designed to build climate resilience at farm level (livelihoods)
Frequency
 6 months
Data source
 CRF/SBP
Methodology for Data Collection
Number of borrowers that avail ATC bundled loans multiplied by 6.3 (average household size
in Pakistan - as benefits are felt in whole household due to greater resileince of household
livelihoods to climate events)
Responsibility for Data Collection
 CRF/SBP
of which are women Number of people) CRI
Description
Number of  female beneficiaries benefit from ATC bundled loan (pre-climate event) – these
loans are designed to build climate resilience at farm level (livelihoods)
Frequency
 6 months
Data source
 CRF/SBP
Methodology for Data Collection
Number of female borrowers that avail ATC bundled loans multiplied by 6.3 (average
household size in Pakistan - as benefits are felt in whole household due to greater resileince of
household livelihoods to climate events)
Responsibility for Data Collection
 CRF/SBP
Of which  Youth (Number of people) CRI
Description
Number of  youth beneficiaries that ATC bundled loan (pre-climate event) – these loans are
designed to build climate resilience at farm level (livelihoods)
Frequency
 Six months
Data source
 CRF/SBP
Methodology for Data Collection
Calcaluted as 18.6% of the number of people benefitting from ATC loans.  18.6% of Pakistan’s
population falls in the 15-24 age bracket as per census of 2023.
Responsibility for Data Collection
 CRF/SBP
Enhanced microfinance sector resilience
People covered by disaster risk finance and insurance (Number of people) CRI
Description
Number of beneficiaries that could receive a recovery loan or credit-top up or a restructured
loan from CRF liquiditiy following a flooding event.
Frequency
 6 months
Data source
 CRF/SBP
Methodology for Data Collection
Number of borrowers who access CRF liqudity post flood (for new loan, top-up or
restructuring) multiplied by 6.3 (average household size in Pakistan - as benefits are felt in
whole household due to access to disaster risk finance)
Responsibility for Data Collection
 CRF/SBP
People covered by disaster risk finance and insurance - Female (Number of people) CRI
Description
Number of  female beneficiaries that could receive a recovery loan or credit-top up on a
restructured loan from CRF liquiditiy following a flooding event.
Frequency
 6 months
Data source
 CRF/SBP
Methodology for Data Collection
Number of female borrowers who access CRF liqudity post flood (for new loan, top-up or
restructuring) multiplied by 6.3 (average household size in Pakistan - as benefits are felt in
whole household due to access to disaster risk finance)
Responsibility for Data Collection
 CRF/SBP
People covered by disaster risk finance and insurance - Youth (Number of people) CRI
Description
Number of notional youth beneficiaries that could receive a recovery loan or credit-top up on

Pakistan: Resilient and Accessible Microfinance (RAM) Project (P181037)

Page 23

a restructured loan from CRF liquiditiy following a flooding event.
Frequency
 Six months
Data source
 CRF/SBP
Methodology for Data Collection
Calcaluted as 18.6% of the number of people benefitting from post flood loans/topups/restructuring (18.6% of Pakistan’s population falls in the 15-24 age bracket as per census
of 2023.
Responsibility for Data Collection
 CRF
CRF liquidity which is deployed to originate loans within 60 days of qualifying floods (Percentage)
Description
Indicator intended to capture the speed at which CRF liquidity is deployed by MFPs to
originate or top-up loans following a qualifying flood.
Frequency
 Following a qualifying flood
Data source
 MFPs that have received CRF liquidity in the last year
Methodology for Data Collection
Lending records of MFPs that received CRF liqudity in the last year.
Calculated by dividing the amount of CRF liquidity lent to MFPs that is deployed by MFPs for
new or top-up loans, by the total amount of CRF liquidity lent to MFPs within 60 days of a
qualifying flood
Responsibility for Data Collection
 MFPs, CRF

Monitoring & Evaluation Plan: Intermediate Results Indicators by Components
Climate Risk Facility
MFPs in flood impacted areas benefiting from CRF liquidity support (Percentage)
Description
MFPs with active portfolios in qualifying flood impacted geographies that access liquidity available under the CRF.
Frequency
 Yearly
Data source
 CRF
Methodology for Data
Collection
 Lending agreements between the CRF and MFPs, and associated lending records
Responsibility for Data
Collection
 CRF/SBP
Borrowers with enhanced resilience to climate change through agritech loan products (and % of which women) (Number)
Description
Number of borrowers that received a bundled agritech loan offered by MFPs, and the percentage of these borrowers
which were female.
Frequency
 Yearly
Data source
 MFPs
Methodology for Data
Collection
 MFP lending records
Responsibility for Data
Collection
SBP/CRF
Innovative agricultural lending products which have been designed (Number)
Description
 Number of bundled agritech loan products which have been designed and approved by MFPs in conjunction with ATCs.
Frequency
 Yearly
Data source
AFIC, MFPs, ATCs
Methodology for Data
Collection
  Signed agreements between ATCs and MFPs
Responsibility for Data
Collection
 SBP/CRF
MFPs given liquidity through the Innovative Agriculture Liquidity product of CRF (Number)
Description
Number of microfinance providers which have accessed liquditiy through the IAL product under the CRF.
Frequency
 Yearly
Data source
 CRF

Pakistan: Resilient and Accessible Microfinance (RAM) Project (P181037)

Page 24

Methodology for Data
Collection
 Lending agreements between the CRF and MFPs, and associated lending records
Responsibility for Data
Collection
 CRF
Average size of a microloan to female borrowers as a percentage of average size of a microloan to male borrowers originated using CRF liquidity
(Percentage)
Description
In 2024, average loans to female borrowers are ~64% of the size of loans to male borrowers. By capturing this as a
percentage, the indicator should provide an indicative size of the gap between average loans provided to male and
female borrowers while adjusting for inflation or other factors impacting growth in average loan size. This will be
captured on loans generated from CRF liquidity, and is calculated by dividing the average loan size to female borrowers
by the average loan size to male borrowers, and multiplying by 100.
Frequency
 Yearly
Data source
 MFPs
Methodology for Data
Collection
 Loan records from MFPs receiving CRF liquidity
Responsibility for Data
Collection
 MFPs
Beneficiaries reporting satisfaction with project activities in periodic beneficiary feedback surveys (gender disaggregated) (Percentage)
Description
Share of beneficiaries (end borrowers) that reported satisfaction with project activities (loans generated from IAL or
post-flood CRF liquidity) in periodic beneficiary feedback surveys.
Frequency
Periodic, associated to lending from the CRF
Data source
 MFPs
Methodology for Data
Collection
Beneficiary feedback surveys
Responsibility for Data
Collection
MFPs
