===== SOURCE FILE: BOSIB-bd201446-d64d-4ead-9f51-d9a2d56d37cf.pdf =====

Official Use Only

FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Report No: PADHI01291

INTERNATIONAL BANK FOR RECONSTRUCTION AND DEVELOPMENT

PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
ON A
PROPOSED LOAN

IN THE AMOUNT OF US$77.2 MILLION

TO THE

REPUBLIC OF PERU

FOR A

STRENGTHENING OF THE PRIORITY TOURISM DESTINATION AREQUIPA-COLCA IN PERU PROJECT

JUNE 16, 2026

Finance, Competitiveness and Investment Practice Area
Latin America And Caribbean Region

This document has a restricted distribution and may be used by recipients only in the performance of their official
duties. Its contents may not otherwise be disclosed without World Bank authorization.
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized

Official Use Only

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS

(Exchange Rate Effective March 31, 2026)

Currency Unit =   Peruvian Soles
Nuevos (PEN)
PEN 3.39 = US$1

FISCAL YEAR
January 1 - December 31

Regional Vice President: Susana Cordeiro Guerra
Regional Director: Oscar Calvo-Gonzalez
Country Director: Issam A. Abousleiman
Practice Manager: Stefka Slavova
Task Team Leader(s): Hind Kadiri, Thomas Haven, Cecilia Nallely Escalante Hernandez

Official Use Only
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

ATTA
Adventure Travel Trade Association
CCDR
Country Climate and Development Report
CE
Citizen Engagement
CUT
Treasury Unique Account (Cuenta Única del Tesoro)
DA
Designated Account
DFIL
Disbursement and Financial Information Letter
EAS
ESCP
Environmental and Social Assessment
Environmental and Social Commitment Plan
ESF
Environmental and Social Framework
ESMP
FDI
Environmental and Social Management Plan
Foreign Direct Investment
FM
FPIC
Financial Management
Free, Prior and Informed Consent
GDP
Gross Domestic Product
GIZ
German Development Agency (Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale
Zusammenarbeit)
GFPP
Grant Facility for Project Preparation
GORE
Regional Government (Gobierno Regional)
IDB
Inter-American Development Bank
IPF
Investment Project Financing
IPP
Indigenous Peoples Plan
JICA
Japan International Cooperation Agency
LMP
Labor Management Procedures
MEF
Ministry of Economy and Finance (Ministerio de Economía y Finanzas)
MINCETUR
Ministry of Trade and Tourism (Ministerio de Comercio Exterior y Turismo)
MTC
Ministry of Transportation and Communications (Ministerio de Transportes y
Comunicaciones)
NDC
Nationally Determined Contribution
PDO
Project Development Objective
PERTUR
Regional Tourism Strategic Plan (Plan Estratégico Regional de Turismo)
PIU
Project Implementing Unit
POM
SABNR
Project Operational Manual
Salinas and Aguada Blanca National Reserve
SEA
SEP
SH
Sexual Exploitation and Abuse
Stakeholder Engagement Plan
Sexual Harassment
SERNANP
National Protected Area Service (Servicio Nacional de Áreas Naturales Protegidas por el
Estado)
WB
World Bank

STRENGTHENING OF THE PRIORITY TOURISM DESTINATION
AREQUIPA-COLCA IN PERU (P511489)
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

Official Use Only
TABLE OF CONTENTS

DATASHEET ........................................................................................................................... i
I.
STRATEGIC CONTEXT ..................................................................................................... 1
A. Project Strategic Context ................................................................................................................. 1
B. Sectoral and Institutional Context ................................................................................................... 1
II.
PROJECT DESCRIPTION .................................................................................................. 4
A. Project Development Objective ....................................................................................................... 4
B. Theory of Change and PDO Indicators ............................................................................................. 4
C. Project Beneficiaries ........................................................................................................................ 8
D. Project Components ........................................................................................................................ 8
E. Role of Partners ..............................................................................................................................14
F. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design ....................................................................14
III. PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION ........................................................................................ 15
A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements ..........................................................................15
B. Results Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E).....................................................................................16
C. Disbursement Arrangements .........................................................................................................16
IV. PROJECT APPRAISAL SUMMARY .................................................................................. 16
A. Technical, Economic and Financial Analysis ..................................................................................16
B. Fiduciary .........................................................................................................................................20
C. Environmental, Social and Legal Operational Policies ...................................................................21
Grievance Redress Services ................................................................................................................23
V. KEY RISKS .................................................................................................................... 23
ANNEX 1. RESULTS FRAMEWORK ........................................................................................ 25

STRENGTHENING OF THE PRIORITY TOURISM DESTINATION
AREQUIPA-COLCA IN PERU (P511489)
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

i

Official Use Only

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padbasicinformation#doctemplate
DATASHEET
BASIC INFORMATION
Project
Beneficiary(ies)
Operation Name
Peru
STRENGTHENING OF THE PRIORITY TOURISM DESTINATION AREQUIPA-COLCA IN PERU
Operation ID
Financing Instrument
Environmental and Social Risk
Classification

P511489
Investment Project
Financing (IPF)
Substantial

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padprocessing#doctemplate
Financing & Implementation Modalities
[  ] Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA)
[  ] Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC)
[  ] Series of Projects (SOP)
[  ] Fragile State(s)
[  ] Performance-Based Conditions (PBCs)
[  ] Small State(s)
[  ] Financial Intermediaries (FI)
[  ] Fragile within a non-fragile Country
[  ] Project-Based Guarantee
[  ] Conflict
[  ] Deferred Drawdown
[  ] Responding to Natural or Man-made Disaster
[  ] Alternative Procurement Arrangements (APA)
[  ] Hands-on Expanded Implementation Support (HEIS)
Expected Approval Date
Expected Closing Date
09-Jul-2026
30-Jun-2032
Bank/IFC Collaboration
Joint Level
Yes
Complementary or Interdependent project requiring active coordination
Proposed Development Objective(s)

The PDO is to improve the quality of tourism infrastructure and services, the conditions of natural and cultural heritage
sites, and to increase sustainable tourism activity in the Arequipa-Colca corridor.

STRENGTHENING OF THE PRIORITY TOURISM DESTINATION
AREQUIPA-COLCA IN PERU (P511489)
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

ii

Official Use Only

Components
Component Name
Cost (US$)
1. Improve the quality of selected tourism attractions and services
51,170,000.00
2. Upgrade roads and investment in water, sanitation and health facilities
37,060,000.00
3. Transversal Support Activities - Institutional Strengthening
3,460,000.00
4. Project implementation unit
5,910,000.00
 @#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padborrower#doctemplate

Organizations

 Borrower/Recipient:
 Republic of Peru
 Implementing Agency:
 Regional Government of Arequipa

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padfinancingsummary#doctemplate
PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)
Maximizing Finance for Development
Is this an MFD-Enabling Project (MFD-EP)?
Yes
Is this project Private Capital Enabling (PCE)?
No

SUMMARY
Total Operation Cost
97.80
Total Financing
97.80
of which IBRD/IDA
77.20
Financing Gap
0.00
DETAILS
World Bank Group Financing

STRENGTHENING OF THE PRIORITY TOURISM DESTINATION
AREQUIPA-COLCA IN PERU (P511489)
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

v

Official Use Only
NOTE: For further information regarding the World Bank’s due diligence assessment of the Project’s potential
environmental and social risks and impacts, please refer to the Project’s Appraisal Environmental and Social Review
Summary (ESRS).

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padlegalcovenants#doctemplate
LEGAL
Legal Covenants
Sections and Description
Institutional Arrangements – Project Oversight and Counterpart Funds (Section I A1 of Schedule 2 to the Loan
Agreement): MINCETUR shall be responsible for the Counterpart Funds and the oversight of the Project, including the
provision of technical support for the implementation of the Project, as further detailed in the Project Operations
Manual.
Institutional Arrangements – Project Implementation (Section I A2 of Schedule 2 to the Loan Agreement): The overall
implementation of the Project shall be carried out through GORE Arequipa, which will create and thereafter maintain,
throughout Project implementation, a Project implementation unit (the “PIU”) with functions, responsibilities, and
resources, and staffed with personnel in number and with terms of reference, qualifications, experience, and functions
acceptable to the Bank, all as further specified in the Project Operations Manual, including inter alia: (a) the Key Staff;
and (b) the following personnel to be hired or appointed, within the PIU, no later than sixty (60) days after the Effective
Date: the technical coordinator; the head of the environmental and social unit; the legal officer; the head of the
infrastructure unit; and the head of tourism development unit; all as further detailed in the Project Operations Manual.
Institutional Arrangements – Project Steering Committee (Section I A3 of Schedule 2 to the Loan Agreement): The
Borrower, through GORE Arequipa shall create, and thereafter maintain until the completion of the Project, a
committee (the “Project Steering Committee”) to oversee the implementation of the Project, including, among others,
the vice minister of tourism of MINCETUR, or his/her representative; the governor of GORE Arequipa; a representative
from MEF, with the PIU acting as a secretariat for said Project Steering Committee and with membership and functions
acceptable to the Bank, as defined in the Project Operations Manual, including follow up on the PIU’s execution of the
Project.
Institutional Arrangements – Consultative Committee (Section I A4 of Schedule 2 to the Loan Agreement): The Borrower
through GORE Arequipa, shall create and thereafter maintain until the completion of the Project, a consultative
committee (the “Consultative Committee”) to support implementation of the Project and facilitate inter-sectoral
coordination, with membership and functions acceptable to the Bank, as defined in the Project Operations Manual.
Implementation Arrangements – Interinstitutional Agreement (Section I D of Schedule 2 to the Loan Agreement) To
facilitate the carrying out of Parts 1 and 2 of the Project, the Borrower through GORE Arequipa, shall: (a) prior to the
carrying out of any such Project activity under the jurisdiction of a Participating Municipality or a Project Stakeholder ,
enter into an agreement with said Participating Municipality or Project Stakeholder (each, a “ Interinstitutional
Agreement”), under terms and conditions approved by the Bank, which shall include, inter alia, the obligation of each
Participating Municipality or Project Stakeholder to take or permit to be taken all actions to enable GORE Arequipa to
carry out the Project, and provide the necessary technical and institutional support for the timely preparation and
implementation of the relevant Project activity; and (b) exercise its rights and perform its obligations under each
Interinstitutional Agreement in such manner as to protect the interests of the Borrower and those of GORE Arequipa
and the Bank in order to accomplish the purposes of the Loan.

STRENGTHENING OF THE PRIORITY TOURISM DESTINATION
AREQUIPA-COLCA IN PERU (P511489)
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

vi

Official Use Only
Implementation Arrangements – Cooperation Agreement (Section I C of Schedule 2 to the Loan Agreement) To facilitate
the implementation of the Project, MINCETUR shall enter into an agreement with GORE Arequipa (the “Cooperation
Agreement”) confirming the use of the proceeds of the Loan and the Counterpart Funds by GORE Arequipa for the
implementation of the Project on a non reimbursable basis, all under terms and conditions acceptable to the Bank
Other undertakings: (Section IV of Schedule 2 to the Loan Agreement) A. The Borrower, through GORE Arequipa, shall
prepare not later than ninety (90) days after the Effective Date and thereafter implement the Stakeholder Engagement
Plan, in form and substance satisfactory to the Bank. B. The Borrower, through GORE Arequipa, shall prepare not later
than one hundred twenty (120) days after the Effective Date and thereafter implement the Capacity Building Plan, the
Labor Management Procedures, and the SEA/SH Action Plan, in form and substance satisfactory to the Bank.

@#&OPS~Doctype~OPS^dynamics@padconditions#doctemplate
Conditions
Type
Citation
Description
Financing Source
Effectiveness
LA Art. IV
The Project Operations
Manual has been adopted
by GORE Arequipa, with
the no-objection of
MINCETUR in a manner
satisfactory to the Bank
IBRD/IDA
Effectiveness
LA Art. IV
The PIU has been created
and its Key Staff appointed
in form and substance
satisfactory to the Bank;
IBRD/IDA
Effectiveness
LA Art. IV
The Project Steering
Committee and
Consultative Committee
have been established in
form and substance
satisfactory to the Bank;
IBRD/IDA
Effectiveness
LA Art IV
The Cooperation
Agreement has been
entered into by the
Borrower and GORE
Arequipa in form and
substance satisfactory to
the Bank.
IBRD/IDA
Disbursement
LA Section III B. Withdrawal
Conditions
No withdrawals shall be
made for Goods, works,
non-consulting services,
consulting services,
Operating Costs, and
Training for
Parts/components 1 and 2
IBRD/IDA

STRENGTHENING OF THE PRIORITY TOURISM DESTINATION
AREQUIPA-COLCA IN PERU (P511489)
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

vii

Official Use Only
of the Project until and
unless the Bank has
received at least three
signed Interinstitutional
Agreements, all in form and
substance satisfactory to
the Bank.

STRENGTHENING OF THE PRIORITY TOURISM DESTINATION
AREQUIPA-COLCA IN PERU (P511489)
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

Page 1

Official Use Only
I. STRATEGIC CONTEXT
A. Project Strategic Context
1.
Peru has made significant economic gains, but faces challenges including low productivity, spatial inequality,
and untapped potential in sectors such as tourism.  Between 2002 and 2013, Peru grew at 6.1 percent, almost double
the regional average, and enjoyed macroeconomic and political stability. Growth resulted from a substantial reform
program that leveraged its economic and natural endowments in mining and agriculture, as well as from key reforms to
promote transparency and accountability of the macro-fiscal framework in the 1990s. However, progress stalled during
the last decade, as growth slowed to an average of 3 percent post-2014. Total investment has stagnated, and since 2014,
90 percent of Peru’s growth has come solely from consumption. The poverty rate has been stagnant since 2014, and
labor market improvements have been limited, with an increase in informality. The slowdown has revealed important
structural challenges: low productivity and persistent spatial disparities, in addition to increased political instability in
recent years. Peru remains one of the most unequal countries in Latin America in terms of the income gap between the
richest and the poorest region. Climate change will likely exacerbate existing regional disparities by increasing the impacts
and frequency of natural hazards. And yet, Peru has a track record of leveraging its comparative advantages: nontraditional agricultural and mining exports grew 15 and 9 times in value respectively between 2000 and 2022. It still has
untapped potential in other sectors such as tourism, considering its cultural and natural endowments.

2.
Economic convergence among its regions can be part of the solution to inclusive growth, through more efficient
public investment and higher private investment targeted at high potential sectors. In parallel to addressing systemic
structural challenges, identifying and unlocking comparative advantages in lagging regions holds the potential for the
private sector to increase investments and create quality jobs across Peru. While public investment is high compared to
OECD countries and to regional peers at 4.5 percent of Gross Domestic Product (GDP), the returns from these investments
for service delivery and regional growth fall far short of their potential due to weaknesses in public investment
management and coordination. Investment decisions are highly fragmented across sectors and levels of government,
undermining Peru’s ability to strategically address cross-cutting regional development challenges. Improving Peru’s
public investment management also holds promise to unlock regional development potential, through well-designed and
coordinated multisectoral interventions.
B. Sectoral and Institutional Context
3.
Peru is a country renowned for its rich built and intangible cultural heritage and diverse natural ecosystems. It
is one of the 17 mega-diverse countries in the world, boasting a wide array of endowments. The country is home to more
than 70 globally important archaeological sites, including the iconic Machu Picchu, and it is ranked second in the world
for avian diversity. Peru's culinary scene is also globally recognized. These attributes have made Peru a popular
destination for both domestic and international tourists, contributing significantly to the national economy. Following
steady growth over the prior decade, in 2019 (peak pre-pandemic year) tourism contributed 9.3 percent of Peruvian GDP
and 7.5 percent of the country’s total employment1 from nearly 4.5 million international arrivals and 50 million domestic
visits. The pandemic has severely impacted the sector, and in 2025 Peru received 4.2 million international tourists, 78
percent of pre-pandemic levels. In 2023, 21 percent of international tourists came from the US and Canada, 52 percent
from South America, and about 6 percent from Europe.2

4.
Tourism has high potential to support inclusive regional economic development and to create more and better
jobs in Peru, including for women, youth, and indigenous communities. Tourism flows and investments have been
narrowly concentrated in a few destinations, such as Lima, Cusco and Machu Picchu, with smaller flows attracted to

1 World Travel and Tourism Council (WTTC) Economic Impact Reports
2 MINCETUR (2024), Tourist Data System.

STRENGTHENING OF THE PRIORITY TOURISM DESTINATION
AREQUIPA-COLCA IN PERU (P511489)
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

Page 2

Official Use Only
Arequipa, Ica, Nazca, Puno, and other regions. Further development of tourism outside of Lima and Cusco/ Machu Picchu
can thus reduce regional disparities. Tourism is among the most job intensive sectors, and some tourism segments
relevant for Peru, such as adventure and nature-based tourism, are particularly job-intensive. Tourism also has a high
jobs multiplier effect: future jobs will come not only from direct tourism employment, but also industries that supply
tourism, such as agriculture, construction, transportation, retail, creative industries, and handicrafts. Tourism can
disproportionately boost opportunities for women, since the industry is labor intensive and has higher participation rate
of women than other sectors. By covering remote locations with limited opportunities, tourism contributes to reducing
intra-regional disparities between urban centers and rural areas with natural or cultural patrimony and providing
opportunities for local communities. By fostering transferable skills, the tourism sector is often the first step for young
people into the job market and helps them develop skills that are applicable to other fields and sectors.

5.
The Government of Peru (GoP) has developed strategies and plans to support the development of tourism, yet
both public and private investment remain low. The Ministry of Trade and Tourism (MINCETUR) developed the Plan
Estratégico Nacional de Turismo 2025 (PENTUR), complemented by the Perú Estrategia Nacional de Reactivación del
Sector Turismo 2022-2025 following the pandemic, which prioritized the development of 17 destinations.3 It also supports
regional planning (for example, the Arequipa Plan Estratégico Regional de Turismo 2021-2026, PERTUR), private
investment (e.g., with incentives such as lower value-added tax on hotels and restaurants), and the investment and
tourism promotion agency (PromPerú). Yet in 2005-2023, the GoP invested only 0.8 percent of its budget on tourism,
putting the sector in 19th place of the 39 sectors in the public investment budget.  Between 2018 and 2023, Peru ranked
4th in LAC on announcements of greenfield foreign direct investment (FDI) in tourism. FDI for tourism in Peru was only
US$85m in 2023 (0.3 percent of the total FDI stock). Some of Peru’s destinations are mature enough to generate
significantly more revenue with relatively small, but strategic public investment.

6.
Efficient budgeting and implementation of investments in tourism are hindered by lack of coordination within
a highly fragmented institutional landscape, as well as by complexities of Peru’s public investment system. MINCETUR
handles national-level strategic planning and supports regional planning. The Ministry of Culture oversees cultural
heritage sites. The National Protected Area Service (SERNANP) is responsible for national parks. Regional and municipal
governments also have responsibility for local infrastructure and tourism but lack the resources and capacities for
effective action. While tourism development requires multi-sector interventions, including transport infrastructure,
sanitation, and others, there is no strategic national investment plan that guides investments across sectors and levels of
government. Each sectoral ministry and subnational government prioritize its investments based on entity-specific
strategic plans. There is currently no mechanism to coordinate, prioritize and fund investments around cross-sectoral
strategic objectives, such as regional economic development through tourism. Unlocking the tourism potential of Peru’s
destinations hence requires an innovative approach to planning and implementing a strategic regional investment
program across sectors and levels of government and involving the private sector.

7.
The Arequipa region of southern Peru has high potential for tourism development thanks to its diverse
endowments, which make it attractive for multiple tourism segments including cultural, nature and adventure
tourism. Arequipa is the second largest city of Peru, and one of the most beautiful colonial cities in South America with
significant cultural sights. Its historic center was declared World Heritage Site by UNESCO in 2000. It has a renowned
culinary offering, and a dramatic volcanic landscape as a backdrop. The region has a diversity of natural, historical and
cultural endowments suited to gain global recognition. It hosts the first UNESCO recognized Geopark in Peru, located
between the Colca Valley and the Volcanoes in the provinces of Caylloma and Castilla, which includes geological,
ecological, paleontological and architectural elements. The Colca Valley surrounds one of the deepest canyons in the
world, particularly famous for bird watching, as well as for trekking trails, and hot springs, and hosts several small villages
with Hispanic churches and temples. The region is also renowned for alpaca, llama and vicuña husbandry and textiles.

3 See Peru Estrategia Nacional de Reactivación del Sector Turismo 2022-2025 for detail on the 17 prioritized destinations.

STRENGTHENING OF THE PRIORITY TOURISM DESTINATION
AREQUIPA-COLCA IN PERU (P511489)
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

Page 3

Official Use Only
The Arequipa-Colca area has strong endowments for cultural, nature and adventure tourism which are positively
impactful segments from a development perspective, as they tend to attract higher-value visitors, willing to pay a
premium for exciting and authentic experiences, support local economies and encourage sustainable practices. For
instance, adventure tourism creates 2.6 local jobs per US$100,000 in revenue compared with 1.5 jobs for similar mass
tourism spending (ATTA 2021).

8.
Market demand analysis indicates substantial tourism growth potential for Arequipa-Colca. International and
domestic travel and tourism spending globally, as well as global air passengers, are projected to grow by over 3 percent
annually over the next 10 years.4 Growth in the sector’s direct contribution to GDP in LAC is estimated at nearly 3 percent
over a similar period. Given that Peru underperforms regional comparators in tourism arrivals, there is scope to capture
a larger share of this growing market.  Growth is projected to be substantially higher in segments that are particularly
relevant for Peru and Arequipa, including adventure and ecotourism. Over the next decade, adventure tourism (which
accounts for about 30 percent of global leisure tourism) is projected to grow about 8 percent annually and ecotourism
by 14 percent.  In 2024, the Arequipa region had 1.6 million registered hotel stays, of which 30 percent were international
visitors, equivalent to only 14 percent of Peru’s foreign arrivals. With proper investment and promotion, hotel stays in
Arequipa could reach 3 million by 2035—corresponding to 4-6 percent annual growth—by capturing greater shares of
Peru’s growing domestic and international markets in target segments. Interviews with tour operators also indicated
interest in expanding offers in Arequipa and integrating Arequipa in Peru itineraries.

9.
The GoP selected Arequipa-Colca as a priority tourism destination, drawing on extensive analytical work led by
the World Bank Group.  The International Finance Corporation (IFC) provided technical assistance to MINCETUR between
2018 and 2022 to improve the country’s management and development of tourism. This included destination
development analyses for Arequipa and other regions, upgrading tourism statistics collection systems, and assessing the
national-level tourism regulatory framework, among other things. The World Bank (WB) has also undertaken extensive
tourism analytical work in Peru from 2020 to present, including destination selection analyses (covering 14 potential
destinations), field visits, an investment identification and prioritization analysis for Arequipa/Colca, and a draft Arequipa
Integrated Tourism Investment Pilot Program. The analyses of the WB and MINCETUR concluded with the selection of
Arequipa for this initial pilot program, based on a set of demand, supply, and destination management criteria.

10.
However, challenges such as inadequate infrastructure and basic services, limited accessibility, insufficient
investment in tourism products and services, and insufficient destination promotion hinder the full realization of
tourism potential in the region of Arequipa (and Peru). Arequipa is a region with significant spatial disparities across its
provinces, in terms of infrastructure, public service access, economic activity, and poverty levels. Poor road connections
between Arequipa and the Colca Valley, as well as within the Colca Valley, limit visits to high potential adventure and
cultural tourism resources. Poor water and sanitation facilities also create a health hazard for communities and tourists
and limits adventure tourism activities, such as kayaking and canyoning. Key tourism resources in Colca, such as the Cruz
de Condor and Chimpa Fortress, are sorely lacking quality tourism facilities and services, such as signage or parking areas.
Destination management and governance also exhibit large capacity and funding gaps and limited coordination between
public and private stakeholders. Addressing these challenges through strategic investments and coordinated efforts can
unlock new opportunities for regional development, enhance visitor experiences, and distribute the economic benefits
of tourism more evenly across the region.

11.
Climate hazards also pose a challenge for tourism. Peru’s geographic diversity makes it highly vulnerable to
climate change and natural hazards. The country’s global share of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions is only 0.3 percent,
however, and is marked as ‘particularly vulnerable’ country on seven out of nine characteristics recognized by the United
Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. Observed and projected climate change impacts include rising

4 WTTC (2025), Global Travel & Tourism is Strong Despite Economic Headwinds. IATA (2024); Global Outlook for Air Transport.

STRENGTHENING OF THE PRIORITY TOURISM DESTINATION
AREQUIPA-COLCA IN PERU (P511489)
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

Page 4

Official Use Only
temperatures, extreme precipitation, and more frequent and severe occurrences of natural disasters, including flooding,
landslides, and droughts linked to the recurrent “El Niño” and “El Niño Costero” phenomena. These impacts particularly
affect the tourism sector. For instance, floods and resulting mudslides weaken transportation infrastructure, road
closures impede access to tourism destinations, particularly those most isolated, and heavy rains destroy cultural sites.

12.
Enhancing Peru’s rural road infrastructure with a focus on climate resilience could create multiple development
pathways, improving safety and reliability for both local communities and tourist, while unlocking tourism potential
in remote areas rich in cultural and natural attractions. In Arequipa, only 0.07 percent of the tertiary road network (red
vecinal) and 28 percent of the departmental roads are paved, compared to 80 percent of the national network. Moreover,
82 percent of the red vecinal is in poor condition. These infrastructure gaps, replicated at a national level, are further
exacerbated by climate vulnerabilities, with annual road damage reaching US$227 million from flooding, while landslides
threaten 100,000 km of roads, particularly in regions like Arequipa. The growing frequency and intensity of these climate
hazards underscore the urgent need for resilient infrastructure planning. Strategic road improvements could unlock
significant complementary benefits and provide more options for tourists amid the expected increase in visitors to
Arequipa due to the planned airport expansion.

13.
Unlocking the tourism potential of Peru’s destinations requires an innovative approach to planning and
implementing a strategic regional investment program across sectors which can be piloted in Arequipa. The Ministry
of Economy and Finance (MEF) has shown strong commitment to piloting a multi-sectoral tourism program in Arequipa,
to learn from it and strengthen public investment management frameworks. Leveraging this authorizing environment for
innovation and experimentation within the country’s public investment system, and with support from the World Bank
Group, MINCETUR, MEF and the Regional Government of Arequipa (GORE) have designed the first subnational multisectoral investment program, the Programa de Fortalecimiento Del Destino Turistico Arequipa-Valle del Colca,
coordinated with four other sector ministries (Culture, Transport, Health, Housing). The proposed project supports the
implementation of this Programa, as a pilot from the sectoral, institutional and public financing perspectives.

II. PROJECT DESCRIPTION

A. Project Development Objective
The PDO is to improve the quality of tourism infrastructure and services, the conditions of natural and cultural heritage
sites, and to increase sustainable tourism activity in the Arequipa-Colca corridor.

The PDO will be monitored through 3 indicators selected based on outcome-orientation, attributability to project
activities within the implementation timeframe, as well as availability of baselines and reliable monitoring systems:
•
PDO1. Number of tourism and cultural heritage sites rehabilitated.
•
PDO2. Direct users that benefit from improved access to sustainable transport infrastructure and services.
(scorecard indicator).
•
PDO3. Arrivals at lodging establishments in the Arequipa region.

B. Theory of Change and PDO Indicators

14.
 The theory of change is anchored in the development challenges to the tourism sector in the region of
Arequipa, caused by poor conditions and services offering of natural, historic and cultural tourism sites, poor quality
of road infrastructure and other basic public services relevant to tourism such as health and sanitation, and deficient
promotion and management of the destination (as set out in earlier sections). This investment project serves multiple
purposes, formulated in the project development objective: (i) improve the quality of tourism infrastructure and

STRENGTHENING OF THE PRIORITY TOURISM DESTINATION
AREQUIPA-COLCA IN PERU (P511489)
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

Page 5

Official Use Only
services (ii); enhance the conditions of natural and cultural heritage sites and (iii) and increase sustainable tourism
activity in the Arequipa region of Peru.

15.
The first objective will be achieved by investing in closing gaps in the infrastructure that are essential for
tourists to be able to visit the region in a safe and enjoyable manner, particularly roads as well as basic services such
as water, sanitation and health. The project includes road improvements that will ensure the population and visitors
increase their access to services, opportunities, and tourism spots. The roads will be upgraded to paved standards, and
the designs consider the climate-induced events prevalent in each location, ensuring the improved designs include
road safety features and appropriate drainage infrastructure. In addition, the project will ensure that, once roads are
completed, maintenance arrangements are put in place to ensure sustainability of the investments. The improved
roads will allow visitors to access specific sites in the region safely, in a reasonable amount of time and in good
conditions. Water, health and sanitation will also improve the quality of the tourists’ experience, while also benefiting
local communities.

16.
The second objective will be achieved by investing in the improvement of selected nature, historic and
cultural sites, through different types of interventions including rehabilitation, access roads, new visitor centers,
restrooms, parking, trails, and viewpoints. The first two objectives will be attained through activities in component 1
and component 2. These project investments are expected to increase the number of tourism and cultural sites that
are rehabilitated (PDO1) and make tourism-related infrastructure of better quality, i.e., more reliable, safe, and climate
resilient (PDO2). By incorporating safety and technical features in the design of the roads, the project will make roads
and streets safer and more climate resilient. Appropriate surface treatments for the different types of traffic, along
with drainage, slope stabilization, among other measures, will make roads better able to withstand climate induced
hazards. The project will also ensure that the design and operation of the roads include all the necessary road safety
features aimed to protect the most vulnerable road users. Infrastructure at tourism sites will also be built considering
energy efficiency and resilience to climate-induced weather.

STRENGTHENING OF THE PRIORITY TOURISM DESTINATION
AREQUIPA-COLCA IN PERU (P511489)
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

Page 6

Official Use Only
17.
The third objective, increasing sustainable tourism activity in the region, will be supported in part by the two
previous ones, as enablers: the infrastructure and sites improvements are prerequisites to make the region more suitable
and attractive for higher tourism activity. The third objective also relies on enhanced tourism promotion and destination
management by the regional government of Arequipa (Component 3). Destination marketing and destination promotion
will support the development of improved tourism products offering, focusing on the tourism segments most relevant
for Arequipa, such as nature, cultural, and adventure tourism. Promotion and marketing will improve the positioning and
the visibility of the region with both independent travelers as well as travel agencies, local and international, and will be
essential to increase the recognition of Arequipa, putting it on the map of must-see regions of Peru, attract more
domestic and international visitors (PDO3), and have them explore more diversified and better quality offer of activities,
which should lead to increased length of stay  and spending locally, creating direct and indirect jobs.

18.
The Project is expected to result in a significant increase in job creation in the region. The region of Arequipa
had an estimated 95,000 jobs in tourism in 2024 (direct and indirect) according to MINCETUR data, and an estimated
105,000 direct jobs based on WB calculations5 using ENAHO data and the UN World Tourism Organization’s tourism
industries classification.6 Direct tourism jobs are expected to be created throughout the value chain, to address the higher
demand due to the increase in the number of tourists and length of stay, enabled by improved infrastructure, tourism
sites and services and destination management. Demand will increase activities and products including lodging,
restaurants, transport, guided visits, and experiences. Indirect and induced jobs are expected to be created through
linkages with other industries such as agriculture, creative industries, construction, or manufacturing. Based on
international experience, job creation is likely to come from micro, small, and medium enterprises (MSMEs) which
represent over 80 percent of tourism firms globally, as well as from independent workers, particularly in countries with
structurally high informality such as Peru. Job creation is expected to benefit particularly youth, local communities, and
women. They will be targeted with activities that raise awareness about opportunities in the tourism sector and tailored
capacity-building to enhance their economic participation.

19.
Based on the expected increase of arrivals and assumptions on the tourists/job ratio, the estimate of job
creation in the tourism sector during the implementation period (by 2030) is about 19,500 direct jobs, of which about
7,900 would be attributable to the project. Alternative methodologies to calculate employment growth were also
considered, for instance based on increases in tourist spending (which is a function of number of arrivals, length of stay,
and spending per day), and they yielded slightly higher job creation estimates. Based on a job multiplier of 1.5 in the
tourism sector, an estimated 29,300 indirect jobs may be created by 2030, which should be mainly in the construction
sector during the first years, and in the productive and services sectors (agriculture, handicraft, etc.) in the later years as
tourism arrivals and consumption increase. Jobs creation will be monitored through innovative methodologies, in
addition to measurements based on ENAHO data. Measuring the impact of project interventions on jobs is difficult
considering the high level of informality, the lack of monitoring of jobs at a granular level (by gender, localities) by the
national entities, and weaknesses of traditional surveys in measuring impacts of localized interventions. To address this
challenge, and with the support of the World Bank Poverty team, the project’s impact on jobs will be estimated through
remote sensing methodologies covering geo-referenced locations, leveraging satellite imagery and artificial intelligence
algorithms.

20.
Gender and female employment. Data from the 2024 national household survey for the Arequipa-Colca
intervention area show that 60.5 percent of working-age women are employed compared to 83 percent of men,

5 Considering that the MINCETUR data is calculated from national accounts and GDP shares rather than actual employment data, the project team calculated an
alternative employment baseline using Peru’s National Household Survey (ENAHO). Employment estimates were derived for individuals aged 14 and older using the
ISIC Rev. 4 classification. This classification enables sex-, age-, and ethnicity-disaggregated analysis of labor market outcomes in the project’s intervention areas.
6 International Recommendations for Tourism Statistics 2008; UNWTO (2008). This classification estimates total employment in tourism industries, with the caveat
that not all employment is directly related to visitor spending. Categories like Transport and Food and Beverage serving activities are to a certain extent driven by
local consumption.

STRENGTHENING OF THE PRIORITY TOURISM DESTINATION
AREQUIPA-COLCA IN PERU (P511489)
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

Page 7

Official Use Only
indicating a gender gap in labor force participation (in line with national averages). Peru also has a large gender wage
gap, estimated at 25 percent in 2021. The most vulnerable (informal, low-paid and uneducated workers) are exposed to
the largest gaps. Gender gap in the tourism sector is limited, as it employs about 14 percent of both working men and
women in 2024 in the Arequipa region. The share of firms with a woman top manager and with majority women
ownership are also higher in food and hotels than the national average. However, women’s participation in tourism is
lower than potential, and women are exposed to a gender wage gap, leaving them more exposed to income insecurity.
Contributors to the gender gap include: i) disproportionate household care burdens ii) lack of basic reliable infrastructure
(transport, health), particularly in rural areas, which increases difficulty of combining household responsibilities with paid
work, iii) exposure to sexual harassment and exploitation risks, and iv) knowledge gap about basic opportunities and skills
to generate income, such as financial literacy, entrepreneurship, access to markets.

21.
The project aims to narrow the gender employment gap by lowering barriers to entry for women, creating
economic opportunities for women in the tourism sector, and empowering women to identify and seize such
opportunities to access new or better jobs. Investments in key access roads, streets, and upgraded water, sanitation,
and health services will increase safety and reduce travel time for women. Rehabilitation and sustainable management
of cultural and natural heritage sites will increase tourists’ arrivals and demand, and expand opportunities in
accommodation, food services, guiding, handicraft, and related businesses where female employment is prevalent.
Mobilizing women organizations for capacity-building under component 1 will raise awareness about new economic
opportunities created by the project interventions and empower women in the corridor to create or expand economic
activities, and to reduce income insecurity. The project’s action plan on sexual exploitation and abuse (SEA) and sexual
harassment (SH) will address barriers to entry emanating from such risks, that can intervene in the workplace. The
combination of interventions aiming at creating jobs and business opportunities and empowering women specifically to
seize them is expected to result in higher participation rate of women in Arequipa in the tourism sector, which will be
tracked as an indicator in the project’s results framework.

22.
Citizen Engagement (CE). The project’s results framework incorporates two indicators oriented to CE: i) the
percentage of project-related grievances addressed by the PIU, through the application of the project-level grievance
mechanism and ii) the involvement of people representing various stakeholder organizations as well as communities in
training opportunities. Multiple channels for taking account of citizen inputs and means by which they can participate in
project-related activities have been specified in the Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP), which itself was informed by a
multi-stakeholder consultation event held in Arequipa in September 2025. The above-mentioned indicators are closely
tied to project activities and will be monitored through PIU reporting as well as baseline, mid-term and final evaluations,
with data disaggregation according to province/district, gender, and ethnicity.

23.
The project is compliant with the Maximizing Finance for Development (MFD) approach and is MFD-enabling,
as investments are designed to create public goods (e.g. roads, tourism assets) and institutional mechanisms to facilitate
private investment. Based on consultations in Arequipa as well as with the Peru investment promotion agency PromPeru,
the private sector (e.g. regional and international hotel operators, tour operators, etc.) is willing to invest once they see
that infrastructure and tourism offerings are upgraded and tourism flows are more likely to increase. The project will
identify specific opportunities for private investment in a range of tourism services provision. Examples could be PPP
options (concessions, land leases, building leases, etc.) around hotels, spas, resorts, rafting, trekking, zip-lining, cable
cars, community accommodation, etc. Moreover, the project is expected to enable private capital through the
government’s Obras por Impuestos (Works for Taxes) mechanism, which allows the private sector to finance and execute
public works in exchange for tax breaks in future years. The project can help identify and coordinate Obras por Impuestos
investments (which could potentially receive IFC financing) that are complementary to the project investments. Partly as
a result of the WB dialogue in the context of this project’s preparation, a consortium of private investors is preparing a
US$126 million private investment program for 2026-2031 focused on Arequipa-Colca, which includes investments in

STRENGTHENING OF THE PRIORITY TOURISM DESTINATION
AREQUIPA-COLCA IN PERU (P511489)
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

Page 8

Official Use Only
roads, digital connectivity, and training programs for local workers. The project team will also leverage dialogue and
technical assistance on the subnational business environment and private sector development through the FCI Peru
PASA, to identify potential additional interventions aiming at increasing SMEs investment in tourism locally.

C. Project Beneficiaries
Direct project beneficiaries include:
-
The population residing in the vicinity of targeted infrastructure and sites improvements, who will benefit from
improved and safer infrastructure, all season roads, and shorter travel times (173,000 beneficiaries)
-
The government of Arequipa, local authorities, and community leaders will benefit from capacity strengthening
(200 beneficiaries).

Indirect project beneficiaries include:
-
Firms and entrepreneurs active in the tourism sector in the region, formal and informal (hotels, restaurants,
tourism guides, agencies, transport compagnies, souvenir shops, handicraft artisans, etc.).
-
Employees of the tourism sector, including women, youth and indigenous communities (19,500 new direct
tourism jobs, out of which 7,900 attributable to the project).
D. Project Components
24.
This project is a pilot to unlock tourism development at the regional level through multi-sector interventions.
The project is designed to address the multifaceted challenges and opportunities for tourism in Arequipa through
coordinated multisectoral investments aiming at identified gaps in connectivity, public services and tourism amenities
and sites. The project recognizes that effective tourism development requires a holistic approach that integrates
infrastructure improvements, cultural heritage preservation, and effective destination management and promotion. By
engaging various stakeholders, including central and local government agencies, private sector entities, and local
communities, the project aims to create a sustainable, resilient, and inclusive tourism ecosystem that benefits both
visitors and local communities. Innovative governance mechanisms seek to address shortcomings identified in Peru’s
public investment management in the recent Country Economic Memorandum and Public Finance Review. The project
has the potential to be the first in a series of investment projects to support tourism development in Arequipa and
beyond. The approach can be scaled up to five or more of the tourism destinations prioritized by MINCETUR. It can result
in a more efficient and nimble system for all sectors and further serve as a blueprint for regional development investment
programs. Considering its potential for innovation, the project was allocated US$500,000 from the Grant Facility for
Project Preparation (GFPP) in July 2025, which is being leveraged to support counterparts’ preparation and improve
readiness for implementation by effectiveness.

25.
The interventions form a geographically coherent package aimed at strengthening the main tourism corridors
around the city of Arequipa and the Colca Valley (as shown in grey shading in the map below). This includes:
a. Sites in and around the Colca Valley, which is about a 4-hour drive north of Arequipa city. A critical mass of
attractions here could transform visits from a day trip from the city of Arequipa (focused mainly on a stop at the
Cruz del Condor anchor attraction) to 2–3-day Colca itineraries.
b. A cluster around the village of Yura (about 45 minutes to the north of the city), which can be part of a day trip from
Arequipa or a stop on the way to the Colca Valley.
c. A day trip from Arequipa city to the Salinas Lagoon and surrounding areas (about 2 hours east of the city). This can
also be connected to a longer itinerary to Colca through future road improvements planned by the government
running northwest from San Juan de Tarucani.

STRENGTHENING OF THE PRIORITY TOURISM DESTINATION
AREQUIPA-COLCA IN PERU (P511489)
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

Page 9

Official Use Only
Figure 1: Proposed project intervention areas

STRENGTHENING OF THE PRIORITY TOURISM DESTINATION
AREQUIPA-COLCA IN PERU (P511489)
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

Page 10

Official Use Only

26.
The interventions were selected through an extensive consultation process between MINCETUR, GORE
Arequipa and local municipalities, with analytical input and validation from the WB team. Selection criteria included
value propositions for different market segments, potential to generate complimentary private investments and jobs,
complexity relative to land ownership and community support, and contribution to raising the overall profile of the
destination – for example the role of a world-class visitor and interpretation center at the Cruz del Condor viewpoint as
a “pull” factor for international markets. Complimentary investments with funding already allocated by the national and
regional governments, e.g. for roads, were also considered. The sub-project details were formulated within Invierte.pe
by various entities, including MINCETUR, Ministry of Culture, GORE Arequipa, and municipalities.

27.
The project's components complement each other to maximize impact. Improving road and sanitation
infrastructure will enhance accessibility and public health, making the region more attractive to tourists. Simultaneously,
investments in cultural heritage sites and tourist services will enrich the visitor's experience, encouraging longer stays
and higher expenditures. Cross-cutting support activities, including tourism promotion and capacity building for
destination management, will strengthen the region's ability to manage and sustain these investments, create jobs, as
well as attract tourists and private investment.

28.
The project benefits from coordination and complementarity with other WBG projects and technical assistance
(TA) across sectors. The project benefits from close collaboration with the IFC and will shed light on potential
opportunities for IFC support to private investment. On climate-risk management, the project will leverage ongoing TA
on Disaster Risk Finance, which is developing innovative insurance programs for public assets in high-risk areas, which
are potentially applicable to public sites supported by this project. It will also leverage dialogue and technical support led
by Institutions on improving public investment systems and increasing efficiency of coordination across levels of
government.

29.
The project structure parallels the design that MINCETUR has prepared in coordination with MEF and GORE
Arequipa. In the terminology of Peru’s public investment system (Invierte.pe), the project is an investment program,
composed of 33 individual investment interventions in tourism, culture, transport, water/sanitation, health, and
environment, plus an institutional strengthening and project management component. Details on each of the 33
investments are included in the project files. The overall program was determined “viable” in Invierte.pe on December
11, 2025 by the formulating unit in the General Directorate of Tourism Strategy in MINCETUR, after receiving a favorable
opinion from the MEF. The total project amount is US$97.61 million, of which the WB would finance 79.1 percent
(US$77.2 million), with the remainder coming from counterpart funds (Component amounts shown below are for
combined WB and counterpart funding). On June 30, 2025, an inter-institutional cooperation agreement on the
implementation of the program was signed by MINCETUR and GORE Arequipa, a first in Peru.

Component 1. Improve the quality of selected tourism attractions and services (US$51.17 million)

30.
This component aims at improving and expanding the offer of tourism sites and attractions within selected routes
in the region of Arequipa, with a mix of natural, cultural, archaeological, historic, and spiritual sites. The aim is to cater
to the demand of a large number of tourists, whether international or domestic, and offer sufficient diversity to trigger
longer stays in the region.  Based on assessments of the current state of these sites, improvements have been identified
and involve different types of interventions aiming at improving accessibility, attractiveness, safety, and the tourist
experience—such as through rehabilitation, access roads, visitor centers, restrooms, parking, trails, and viewpoints.

31.
Subcomponent 1.1 Develop and improve services in targeted sites and attractions. The subcomponent focuses
on investments to upgrade public tourism services at selected sites in the region (see map), along with soft investments
to improve site management and expand opportunities for the participation of local communities in the provision of
quality tourism products and services. They provide a comprehensive set of attractions for expanded visits of touring

STRENGTHENING OF THE PRIORITY TOURISM DESTINATION
AREQUIPA-COLCA IN PERU (P511489)
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

Page 11

Official Use Only
segments and independent travelers seeking adventure, nature, and cultural experiences. Investment packages for each
site include a mix of access roads, visitor centers, restrooms, parking, trails, signage, museography, viewpoints, entry
control booths, and training:

•
Mirador de la Cruz del Condor
•
Sitio Arqueológico Fortaleza del Chimpa
•
Castillos Encantados de Callalli, Ventanas del Colca, Cuevas de Mollepunku, and Pueblo de Sibayo
•
Anfiteatro de Occolle, Complejo Arqueológico de Uyo Uyo, Pueblo de Yanque, and Tumbas de Shininea
•
Reserva Nacional de Salinas y Aguada Blanca
•
Geiser de Pinchollo
•
Catarata de Capua, Hornos de Cal, and Mirador de Coipata
•
Mirador de Patapampa and Pueblo de Chivay
•
Pueblo la Calera and Volcan Nichollson

32.
The activities contribute to climate change mitigation through renewable energy and environmental
management, and strengthen adaptation with storm drainage, retaining walls, and resilient tourist infrastructure.7

33.
Capacity building and training are planned for local communities and organizations to provide improved tourism
products and services around the targeted sites. These capacity building activities will target women specifically, through
women associations, such as the Asociación de damas artesanas y comerciantes Chaclla Cruz de Cabanaconde, who are
active around the Cruz del Condor flagship attraction. Trainings will be designed to i) inform about the Project and raise
awareness about opportunities for women resulting from it, such as the provision of new services and products to a
higher flow of tourists, and ii) address constraints to female participation in tourism products and services, such as
vending and communication skills, product promotion, and financial literacy. Training will be developed need-based, and
in complementarity and coordination with existing programs and initiatives led by MINCETUR and other stakeholders.

34.
Subcomponent 1.2. Rehabilitate cultural sites. The subcomponent focuses on the rehabilitation of 10 historic
churches and temples in the Colca Valley. The churches were built in the 17th to 19th centuries and are in various states
of disrepair, many having suffered earthquake damage. With proper restoration and interpretation, they can become
attractive stops on American and European touring itineraries, as well as for domestic and regional cultural and religious
tourists. Investments are expected to include restoration of church infrastructure (walls, towers, ceilings), restoration of
mural paintings, development of interpretive panels, preparation of management manuals/guides, and training. The
interventions advance mitigation through renewable-powered lighting and energy-efficient systems, and strengthen
adaptation with storm drainage, resilient infrastructure, and risk management measure.8

35.
Component 2. Upgrade roads and investing in water, sanitation and health facilities (US$37.06 million)
This component is focused on improving connectivity and public infrastructure along the main tourism routes of the region
with infrastructure designs that take into consideration the climate-induced hazards prevalent in the area. The objective
is to increase safety (transport and health), reduce travel times, and provide necessary infrastructure to ensure reliability
and quality experience for tourists.

7 Mitigation measures include installing PV panels for lighting, charging stations for electric bicycles, and thermo-acoustic covers for energy
efficiency. Adaptation measures include constructing storm drainage systems and retaining walls; reinforcing metal structures for viewpoints and
trails; and siting tourist facilities to avoid landslide-prone areas.
8 Mitigation measures include installing LED lighting with heat sensors and timers and PV systems for outdoor lighting. Adaptation measures
include restoration with traditional techniques and materials for greater climate resilience, strengthening structures and drainage to prevent
damage from heavy rainfall, and preparation of risk management and maintenance manuals with staff training.

STRENGTHENING OF THE PRIORITY TOURISM DESTINATION
AREQUIPA-COLCA IN PERU (P511489)
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

Page 12

Official Use Only
36.
Subcomponent 2.1 Roads. This subcomponent will finance investments in the tertiary road network (vecinal) and
local streets, targeting road and street infrastructure that contributes to the tourism objectives while ensuring the
population increases their access to opportunities and services in a safe and reliable manner. Designs will take into
consideration the local context and climate-induced hazards that usually affect road and street infrastructure in the area,
such as landslides. Rehabilitation and improvement works will adopt specifications that enhance road safety, a critical
priority given that the Arequipa region has sustained a higher road fatality rate than the national average since at least
2010. In 2024, Arequipa recorded 11.7 road traffic deaths per 100,000 people, a significantly higher rate than Peru's
national average of 8.8 deaths per 100,000 inhabitants. The designs will also increase structural reliability, and increase
climate resilience through measures such as improved drainage, slope stabilization, etc. The design approach will ensure
the dual functionality of meeting technical performance standards (e.g., reducing vehicle operating costs) without
compromising the distinctive landscape and cultural character of the area. The improvements will support the climate
resilience of existing rural transport systems, especially in areas that connect several villages along the corridor. Elements
include, inter alia, paving, drainage improvements, slope stabilization, and road safety features that ensure the safety of
the most vulnerable users of the roads (e.g., guardrails, road markings, pedestrian crossings, audits, and signs).  Besides
road investments, the project will improve streets in two towns along the Colca Valley corridor—Sibayo and Yanque—
with a focus on walkability, safety, cultural preservation, and active mobility. For all the investments in infrastructure,
the project will support arrangements that ensure mechanisms are in place for the ongoing maintenance and
sustainability of the improved assets. Investments include:
•
AR-683 (33km) road between Pueblo de Chivay and Pueblo de Sibayo, making it safer to access the charming
historic village of Sibayo in Colca. (Chivay is the main town and tourism hub at the entry to the Colca Valley.)
•
Road between the villages of Maca and Lari in Colca, enabling better access to the stunning Fortaleza de Chimpa.
•
Road to the village of San Juan de Tarucani (AR-759, 6km) in the Reserva Nacional de Salinas y Aguada Blanca,
which will enable tours through the Reserva to visit the village to shop, eat, and stay.
•
Route AR -711 near the town of Yura (between the city of Arequipa and Colca), which will facilitate visits to tourism
attractions close to Yura, e.g. the Catarata de Capua.
•
AR-109 (9km) to improve access to the natural and geologic attraction of Geiser de Pinchollo (near the Cruz del
Condor in Colca).
•
Providing sidewalks to improve walkability and rehabilitate streets within the villages of Sibayo and Yanque
(Colca), using local techniques, which will significantly increase the attractiveness of the towns for tourist visits
and expenditures.

37.
Subcomponent 2.2 Water and sanitation include improving the water, sewerage, and wastewater treatment
services in the districts of San Juan de Tarucani, Maca, and Yura on the identified tourist routes. Having potable water
will benefit the local populations, as well as the tourist experience in local restaurants, restrooms, and lodgings.
Functioning sanitation and avoiding human waste fouling the local land and rivers are critical for public health, hygiene,
and the environment, as well as for tourist experience. Improvements to be financed include drinking water supply and
distribution systems, sewage systems, and wastewater treatment in several villages. Upgrading water supply and
sanitation systems support climate change adaptation by ensuring reliable access to safe water and effective wastewater
management under increasing climate variability, including floods and extreme rainfall. The rehabilitation and
reconfiguration of water distribution and wastewater collection networks strengthen system resilience to flooding,
reduce service disruptions, and lower non-revenue water. At the same time, the subcomponent contributes to climate
change mitigation by reducing methane emissions associated with untreated or poorly managed wastewater and by
protecting receiving ecosystems.

38.
Subcomponent 2.3 Health and environment includes improving the health clinic in the town of Yura and
protecting the Bosque de Queñua. The health clinic would provide better services for both tourists and the local

STRENGTHENING OF THE PRIORITY TOURISM DESTINATION
AREQUIPA-COLCA IN PERU (P511489)
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

Page 13

Official Use Only
population, avoiding a drive for urgent care of over an hour to facilities in the city of Arequipa. The health activity would
finance demolition of the existing health clinic, construction of a larger clinic, hospital furniture and equipment, and
training. The environment activity will support the reforestation (174 ha) and sustainable management of a forest with
significant ecotourism potential. Over the implementation period, the sub-project is expected to reduce greenhouse gas
emissions by approximately 31,000 tCO₂-e9. Activities to be financed include a) reforestation of degraded forest areas
and water retention systems, and b) training and technical assistance related to grazing and agriculture management,
prevention of illegal activities, prevention and control of forest fires, and tourism promotion.10

Component 3. Transversal Support Activities - Institutional Strengthening (US$3.46 million)

39.
This component will support the development of studies, tools, institutions and capacities necessary to manage
and promote the destination to increase the number of visitors, their length of stay, and daily expenditures. It
complements the proposed infrastructure, cultural, and tourism site development investments by focusing on attracting
tourists interested in accessing and experiencing these products. It also helps strengthen regional public sector
stakeholders to coordinate with the private sector, develop products and services, and monitor impacts.

40.
Subcomponent 3.1 Destination marketing and promotion. This subcomponent will focus on developing,
implementing, and monitoring a 3-year branding, promotion, and marketing plan. The objective of the marketing plan is
to position the Arequipa-Colca tourist destination in national and international markets, highlighting its improved natural,
cultural and adventure attractions. The plan will include a diagnosis of the destination, an evaluation of tourism supply
and demand, and a review of current promotional activities. It will identify priority markets, analyze the image of the
destination and its competitors, propose brand positioning with graphic design, and define promotion and marketing
strategies, including actions for each market segment, with an emphasis on digital marketing, press, and participation in
tourism fairs.

41.
Subcomponent 3.2. Capacity building for destination management. This subcomponent will focus on
strengthening the capacity of GORE to manage the destination, including:
•
Develop and implement a plan for GORE to fulfill destination management functions. Examples include research and
intelligence; destination strategic planning; destination marketing and sales; visitor services; destination and product
development; events development; skills development; and community and stakeholder coordination and
partnerships.
•
Develop and implement a tourism information system / observatory to monitor impacts. There is currently a lack of
data on Arequipa visitor profiles, length of stay, visitor spending, direct and indirect tourism jobs, women
participation, tourism offer with lodging and other products supply, sustainability, community perception and
tourists’ satisfaction. This activity would develop the systems, surveys, and partnerships necessary to systematically
collect and interpret such data. It could also include a web platform to provide tourism resources and ticket sales.
•
Develop guidebooks (guiones interpretativos) for the tourist routes supported by the project.
•
Prepare a manual and strengthen capacity for implementing a rapid tourist assistance system in Arequipa/Colca.
•
Implement monitoring and evaluation of the project, including a baseline study and midterm and final evaluations.
This subcomponent would contribute to adaptation through a manual and capacity building for implementing a rapid
tourist assistance system for improved emergency response during climate-induced extreme weather events like floods
and landslides.

9 World Bank calculation using FAO’s EX-ACT tool for GHG estimations and sub-project specific data.
10 Mitigation is achieved through the reforestation of 174 ha of degraded high-Andean forest, which increases carbon sequestration and halts
ongoing emissions from deforestation. Sustainable grazing management, fire prevention, and community-based forest monitoring further reduce
emissions from unsustainable land use. Adaptation benefits include improved water regulation and aquifer recharge through forest restoration,
buffering the impacts of droughts.

STRENGTHENING OF THE PRIORITY TOURISM DESTINATION
AREQUIPA-COLCA IN PERU (P511489)
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

Page 14

Official Use Only
Component 4. Project implementation unit (US$5.91 million). This includes funding for technical, fiduciary,
environmental, social, and administrative functions required for project implementation.
E. Role of Partners
Table 1: Development partners interventions in support to infrastructure and tourism in Peru and Arequipa
Name of Partner
Nature of Involvement /Description
IFC + Japan International
Cooperation Agency (JICA)
Green building and energy-efficiency financing with BBVA Perú, mobilizing US$150 million for
sustainable infrastructure upgrades, including tourism facilities.
UNESCO
Arequipa is associated with two UNESCO designations: the Colca y Volcanes de Andagua UNESCO
Global Geopark and the Historic Centre of Arequipa UNESCO World Heritage Site. The objective is
to safeguard cultural sites and protect geological features, involving local communities in
conservation, education, and sustainable development efforts.
Inter-American Development
Bank (IDB)
Turismo Futuro technical cooperation pilot: Arequipa selected as one of 10 destinations to
receive a diagnostic and action plan for digital tourism transformation.
IDB Invest
Regional MSME finance expansion via a loan to Caja Arequipa (up to US$50 million),
strengthening access to credit for tourism-related enterprises in Arequipa.
Closed US$17 million package (US$12 million loan + US$5 million revolving facility) to expand
sustainable ecotourism properties and strengthen MSME supplier networks.
Development Bank of Latin
America (CAF)
Regional road infrastructure financing (US$200 million) to improve connectivity across tourism
corridors, including routes serving Arequipa.
Urban mobility modernization program supporting integrated transport systems in Peruvian
cities, aligned with Arequipa’s future SIT.
Agence Française de
Développement  + GIZ +
EUROCLIMA
Sustainable Urban Mobility Plan for Arequipa (PMUS-AQP), developed as a strategic blueprint
for future transport investments.
JICA (in cooperation with IDB)
Solid Waste Management Project Phase II (US$60.05 million, JICA share US$45 million)
modernizing waste systems across 18 cities (through 2026).
F. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design
42.
The project design reflects lessons from past and ongoing operations globally, analytical work, and international
good practices. A key source was Lessons Learned and Insights from 10 Years of World Bank Tourism Analytics and
Operations (World Bank, 2024). Lessons include:
•
Importance of integrated planning for multi-sectoral infrastructure development. A key success factor of the
Indonesia Tourism Development Project (P157599) was its comprehensive approach, including multisectoral
infrastructure investments. The importance of identifying and coordinating these investments upfront was a key
lesson learned of the operation. The Arequipa project has identified all of the planned investments upfront, in
coordination with national, regional, and local authorities.
•
Attention to capacity building, particularly for subnational implementing agencies. The Indonesia project, Cusco
Regional Development Project (P117318), Pakistan Integrated Tourism Development Project (P163562), and others
highlighted the critical need to build subnational implementing capacity. The Grant Facility for Project Preparation
(GFPP) for the Arequipa project focuses on capacity building for GORE.
•
Strong involvement of the national government in regionally implemented projects. The Cusco project and Albania
Integrated Urban and Tourism Development project (P155875) found that clear mechanisms are needed for national
government involvement to ensure commitment and help overcome obstacles. For Arequipa, the ongoing support
of MINCETUR to GORE, as well as the project’s steering and technical committees aim to ensure strong national
commitment and support.

STRENGTHENING OF THE PRIORITY TOURISM DESTINATION
AREQUIPA-COLCA IN PERU (P511489)
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

Page 15

Official Use Only
•
Strengthen tourism governance, cross-sector coordination, and build institutional capacity. The Lessons Learned
report highlights that resolving government and market failures in tourism and implementing a tourism strategy
requires coordination that brings together many line ministries, departments, municipalities, and the private sector.
Tourism projects should assess institutional capacity and, where needed, strengthen coordination mechanisms, e.g.
through high-level steering committees, advisory committees, and destination management mechanisms. This lesson
is reflected in Component 3 and the institutional arrangements of the project.
•
Ensure tourism infrastructure investments are strategic and benefit nearby communities. The operations review in
the Lessons Learned report found that focusing on destination development investments in fewer destination areas
or in a linked circuit can be more effective at stimulating demand, mitigating risks, and enabling viability. There should
also be clear benefits for local communities. The project has followed this approach by focusing on the ArequipaColca tourism corridor (see map), and local communities are expected to benefit from better roads, water and
sanitation, and health services, in addition to the impact on jobs.
•
Importance of effective communication and social outreach. The Gambia Tourism Diversification and Resilience
Project (P177179) highlighted the importance of comprehensive stakeholder communication, including with
communities. MINCETUR and GORE have been coordinating closely with the municipalities involved in the project,
and the GFPP will support a communication and outreach campaign with local communities.

43.
The project also builds on lessons from IFC’s comprehensive advisory program to strengthen the tourism sector
in Peru from 2018 to 2022. The advisory work identified the need in Arequipa for coordinated planning and promotion,
robust infrastructure, and effective governance for fostering private investment in tourism.

III. PROJECT IMPLEMENTATION
A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
44.
MINCETUR is the lead formulation agency of the project, and implementation will be the responsibility of GORE
Arequipa. GORE has experience implementing regional infrastructure projects, e.g. roads and water and sanitation. It
does not have experience implementing WB-financed projects, so capacity building and close supervision will be required,
particularly with respect to fiduciary, environmental, and social elements of project implementation. The borrower from
IBRD is MEF (without on-lending to the regional government). A Cooperation agreement will be signed between
MINCETUR and GORE to clarify rights and responsibilities after the loan agreement between MEF and the World Bank.

45.
The PIU will be established in GORE Arequipa. It will be a new unit (Unidad de Gestión) in the GORE with financial,
technical, and administrative autonomy, reporting directly to the regional Governor. It will have both budget and
investment execution functions and will be responsible for the execution of all project activities (e.g., preparation of
technical documents, physical execution, closure, and transfer of assets). Its autonomous structure will allow it to manage
resources efficiently, coordinate with the entities responsible for project formulation and operation (operation and
maintenance), and ensure compliance with required quality standards. The unit will be responsible for registering
physical and financial progress in the official national systems. It will also be responsible for establishing inter-institutional
coordination mechanisms to guarantee sectoral coordination in areas such as tourism, culture, sanitation, transportation,
health, and the environment. The setup of the PIU will be supported by resources of the GFPP before effectiveness on
several aspects including capacity strengthening on procurement, financial management, environmental and social
standards, and institutional coordination, in addition to the technical preparation of specific interventions.

46.
MINCETUR will remain involved at the technical level during implementation, as a technical advisory arm of the
PIU, with the objective of ensuring that the activities are aligned with the National Strategic Plan for Tourism (PENTUR)
and sectoral policies for the promotion and development of tourism. MINCETUR also will have a review and validation
role on technical preparation of the tourism projects, ensuring that the quality and sustainability criteria established by
the sector are met, and provide support on the monitoring and evaluation aspects.

STRENGTHENING OF THE PRIORITY TOURISM DESTINATION
AREQUIPA-COLCA IN PERU (P511489)
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

Page 16

Official Use Only
47.
High-level steering and consultative committees are expected to be formed to oversee and support project
implementation and facilitate high-level coordination across sectors and levels of government. The high-level steering
committee (Comité Directivo) could include:
-
Vice-minister of tourism of MINCETUR
-
Governor of Arequipa
-
Vice-minister of economy of MEF
A consultative committee (Comité Consultivo) is expected to include MEF, MINCETUR, the Ministry of Culture, the
Ministry of Transportation and Communications (MTC), and the Ministry of Housing, Construction, and Sanitation. This
structure leverages lessons learned from other projects, such as the need for agile oversight and consultative
arrangements, a limited number of participants to facilitate meeting arrangements, and protection from cumbersome
bureaucracy and political considerations.

48.
Coordination with the private sector and a broader set of regional stakeholders (municipalities, academia, civil
society, etc.) is expected to take place through periodic meetings of the public-private Comite Consultivo Regional de
Turismo Arequipa (CCRT Arequipa, whose regulation was approved in November 2023 through Decreto Regional No 0052023-Arequipa). Coordination will also be required with SERNAP (Servicio Nacional de Áreas Naturales Protegidas, for
work in the Salinas and Aguada Blanca National Reserve), municipalities, community/indigenous groups, and the private
sector.

B. Results Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E)
49.
The PIU in GORE Arequipa will be responsible for M&E. Monitoring will leverage data collection mechanisms
from existing sources such as MINCETUR and INEI, particularly for some PDO level and high-level indicators. Data
collection and analysis to report on project results will require the setup of complementary mechanisms by the PIU, which
will include collection of data on the progress of projects through the sectors focal points in the PIU, as well as dedicated
surveys for data collection. As part of the capacity strengthening under component 3, the PIU will develop an M&E system
with a broader set of indicators than those included in the IPF results framework, aimed at assessing the impacts of the
projects and informing areas of improvement of the project’s interventions, and more broadly for the regional
development of the tourism sector. Such a region-level M&E mechanism dedicated to tourism is potentially replicable in
other regions. The PIU will conduct baseline studies at the start of the project, with data disaggregation (by
province/district, gender, ethnicity), followed by mid-term and final evaluations. Aspects to be monitored include tourism
demand, profile of visitors, tourism offer with lodging and other products supply, tourists spending, women’s
participation, employment, sustainability, community perception and tourists’ satisfaction.
C. Disbursement Arrangements
50.
Bank loan proceeds will follow the Bank’s disbursement policies and procedures as described in the
Disbursement and Financial Information Letter (DFIL). The Bank will disburse loan proceeds using one of three methods:
(i) advance method with a variable ceiling; (ii) direct payment; and (iii) reimbursement.

IV. PROJECT APPRAISAL SUMMARY
A. Technical, Economic and Financial Analysis
51.
Extensive technical analyses were undertaken for the identification, selection, and preparation of the project
activities by the WBG and the government. The IFC prepared a tourism supply and demand analysis for Arequipa in
2020. Building on the IFC work, the World Bank undertook several missions to Arequipa between 2022 and 2025 to
analyze demand, supply gaps, and potential investments. This included multiple visits by WB tourism planning experts
during 2023 and 2024, which identified a long list of over 50 potential investments, followed by a prioritization exercise
based on the feasibility and expected impact of each investment. This work was done in collaboration with the

STRENGTHENING OF THE PRIORITY TOURISM DESTINATION
AREQUIPA-COLCA IN PERU (P511489)
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

Page 17

Official Use Only
government and culminated in an Arequipa Integrated Tourism Investment Pilot Program proposal in late 2024, which
provides the analytical underpinnings for the project. Building on these analyses, MINCETUR prepared a nearly 400-page
analysis (perfil) for the overall project covering problem identification and diagnostics followed by solution formulation
and evaluation. Similar extensive analyses for each of the 33 planned investments were prepared by various government
entities (MINCETUR, Ministry of Culture, GORE Arequipa, and municipalities).

52.
A detailed economic analysis was conducted through a cost-benefit assessment to determine the expected net
present value (NPV) and economic rate of return (ERR) for the project’s interventions over a projected 20-year period.
The analysis followed four steps: (a) forecasting tourism demand; (b) calculating the economic impact derived from
tourist expenditures; (c) estimating the project costs; and (d) computing costs and benefits to derive the NPV and ERR.
Both, a ‘business-as-usual’ scenario (BAU) and a ‘project effect’ scenario (PE), were taken into consideration in the model.

53.
The project is expected to yield positive returns, with an estimated NPV of US$3,343 million at a 3.27 percent
discount rate, and an ERR of 61 percent by 2044.11 A sensitivity analysis was conducted to assess the robustness of the
model by applying economic shocks to the main variables. The assessed variables were the increase in tourism
consumption and labor income due to the intervention (difference between BAU and PE scenarios), as well as the
assumptions for year-on-year growth in number of visitors and average tourist spending.

Table 2: Summary of Sensitivity Analysis
Variable
Estimate
25% shock*
50% shock*
NPV (US$ million) by 2044
3,343
2,369
1,471
ERR (percent) by 2044
61%
51%
40%
* 25% or 50% combined shock on the increase in tourism consumption, labor income, average tourist spending and arrivals growth
rate due to the program (difference between BAU and PE scenarios).

54.
Demand Assessment: Foreign and domestic tourist arrivals are estimated using baseline data from MINCETUR.
Projections are based on the compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of arrivals from 2014 to 2019 (4.03%). The project
scenario is expected to accelerate growth across distinct timeframes. From 2026 to 2027, the growth rate is projected to
increase by 10 percent, reaching 4.44 percent due to the first interventions, and in the context of positive global tourism
growth trends. The most significant effects are expected to materialize from 2028-2033, coinciding with the completion
of major infrastructure works, with a 50 percent increase in growth, bringing the growth rate to 6.05 percent. From 2034
to 2044, growth is expected to stabilize with a 10 percent increase from the baseline, resulting in a rate of 4.44 percent.
Average tourist spending is projected to remain constant in real terms through 2028 (for coherence and simplicity,
inflation has been excluded from all model calculations).  To estimate average tourism spending under the PE scenario,
the analysis assumes that growth in spending is driven by gradual increases in the average length of stay with a target of
1.7 days in 2030 (which is the current average for Cusco, considered as aspirational level for Arequipa) and 2 days at
maturity. The CAGR for length of stay is estimated at 2.02 percent for 2024–2030, 2.08 percent for 2031–2036, and 0.55
percent from 2037 to 2044, reflecting an initial acceleration followed by slower growth as the market matures. Table
shows the number of visitors and average spending projected to 2044.

11 In accordance with WB guidelines, the calculated social discount rate is 3.27 percent. This rate is derived using the Ramsey equation, which is
expressed as r = β*ε +σ , where β is the pure time preference rate, ε denotes the elasticity of marginal utility, and σ is the expected growth rate of
per capita income/consumption (Ramsey, 1928). According to Lopez (2008), in the case of Peru, β and ε are 1 and 1.9 respectively. The average
expected growth in per capita income in constant prices for the period 2025-2029 is 1.37 percent (IMF World Economic Outlook, 2024).

STRENGTHENING OF THE PRIORITY TOURISM DESTINATION
AREQUIPA-COLCA IN PERU (P511489)
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

Page 18

Official Use Only
Table 3: Summary of Economic Analysis for BAU and PE scenario

Baseline
Business-as-usual scenario
Project Effect scenario
Impact (*)

Number of visitors
National
1,207,036
1,792,420
2,661,703
1,910,279
2,892,189
117,858
230,487
Foreign
454,430
674,818
1,002,089
719,190
1,088,864
44,372
86,775
Average tourist spending
National
US$ 280
US$ 280
US$ 280
US$ 301
US$ 315
US$ 21
US$ 35
Foreign
US$ 436
US$ 436
US$ 436
US$ 470
US$ 491
US$ 34
US$ 55
* Differences between BAU and PE scenarios over the period until said year. Cumulative for tourists.

55.
Employment: The Bank estimates the creation of about 19,500 jobs by 2030, out of which 7,900 would be
attributable to the project.  The 2024 baseline for current jobs in tourism industries in the Arequipa region was calculated
using data from Peru’s national household survey (Encuesta Nacional de Hogares, ENAHO).12 Employment growth is
estimated by dividing the number of total tourist arrivals to lodging establishments in the Arequipa region (as described
in the previous paragraph) by the number of tourists per worker. The number of tourists per worker is assumed to
increase from 15.8 in 2024 to 18 in 2030. This assumption is based on two factors: 1) the number of tourists per worker
is currently low by historical standards (between 2014 and 2019, the rate varied between 18.5 and 22.5); and 2) not all
employment in tourism industries is attributable to visitor demand, meaning that they would not be impacted by the
project interventions. For instance, many of the jobs in food serving and road transport, which are the two largest
employment categories within tourism industries, are based on non-tourist demand. The number of attributable jobs is
calculated by subtracting the business-as-usual scenario from the program effect scenario. Both formal and informal jobs
are included, with a likely share of one-third of formal and two-thirds of informal, similar to current shares.

56.
Public sector provision and financing are the appropriate vehicles to achieve the project’s objectives because
the interventions focus on public goods and services—such as roads, tourism assets, and basic infrastructure—that are
typically underprovided by the private sector due to market failures, particularly in remote areas. The project addresses
critical gaps in infrastructure, sectoral governance, and investment coordination, which require strategic leadership and
resources that only the public sector can reliably supply. By investing in destination management and capacity building
for regional and local governments, the public sector can reduce barriers to private investment and sustainable tourism
development. Furthermore, the project is designed to catalyze private sector participation by creating enabling
conditions, in line with the Maximizing Finance for Development (MFD) approach but recognizes that initial public
investment is necessary to unlock these opportunities and ensure equitable regional development.

57.
The World Bank’s value added is multifaceted and essential for the development of the tourism sector. The
WBG brings global knowledge and best practices from its extensive experience in tourism and regional development
projects, which informs the design and implementation of effective interventions, and is built on previous technical
assistance from IFC and its sectorial expertise. The Bank’s convening power enables collaboration among diverse
stakeholders, including multiple levels of government and private sector actors, fostering the integrated, cross-sectoral
approach required for successful destination development. Through technical assistance and analytical work, the World
Bank supports the selection of priority investments and the development of an innovative, multi-sectoral program that

12 In line with guidance from the UN World Tourism Organization, tourism industries include the following sectors, with ISIC Rev. 4 classifications
shown in parentheses: 1. Accommodation for visitors (5510, 5520, 5590, 6810, 6820); 2. Food and beverage serving activities (5610, 5629, 5630); 3.
Railway passenger transport (4911); 4. Road passenger transport (4922); 5. Water passenger transport (5011, 5021); 6. Air passenger transport
(5110); 7. Transport equipment rental (7710); 8. Travel agencies and other reservation service activities (7911, 7912, 7990); 9. Cultural activities
(9000,  9102, 9103); 10. Sports and Recreational activities (7721, 9200, 9311, 9319, 9321, 9329).

STRENGTHENING OF THE PRIORITY TOURISM DESTINATION
AREQUIPA-COLCA IN PERU (P511489)
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

Page 19

Official Use Only
can serve as models for future initiatives. Its expertise in fiduciary management and safeguards strongly strengthen the
capacity of counterparts in those fields. Additionally, the Bank’s long-term funding commitment provides stability and
continuity, helping to sustain reforms and investments beyond political cycles and ensuring that cross-cutting issues such
as climate resilience, gender inclusion, and benefits for vulnerable populations are systematically addressed.

58.
Paris alignment. The Project is aligned with the goals of the Paris Agreement on both Adaptation and Mitigation.
In its Nationally Determined Contribution (NDC), Peru commits to limit its GHG emissions to a maximum level of 208.8
MtCO2e unconditionally and 179.0 MtCO2e conditionally by 2030. The project supports Peru's commitment to low-GHG
emissions development pathways and mitigation objectives on carbon-neutral tourism and ecosystem restoration, by
promoting the reforestation of degraded forest areas. Additionally, the project promotes the NDC’s adaptation
component where tourism is identified as a priority adaptation sector highlighting its climate vulnerability and the need
for dedicated adaptation measures by enhancing the resilience of tourism destinations, transportation routes and water
conservation. Furthermore, the tourism and transport sectors are also recognized as priority areas in Peru’s National
Adaptation Plan. The project is aligned with Peru’s CCDR where nature-based tourism options are discussed and
investments in water supply and sanitation are identified as a priority.

59.
Assessment and reduction of mitigation risks. The Project has a low risk of preventing Peru’s transition to lowcarbon development pathways, given its support to activities that have a negligible impact on GHG emissions and/or are
universally aligned. By prioritizing climate resilience, safety, and accessibility, the project’s approach to rural road
infrastructure ensures that improvements benefit all users, including those relying on public and non-motorized
transport. Rather than expanding road capacity, the focus is on the comprehensive rehabilitation and maintenance of
existing rural roads—encompassing upgrades, reconstruction, and ongoing upkeep. Through these targeted
interventions, the operation maintains a neutral carbon footprint and actively contributes to the country’s long-term
shift toward sustainable, low-carbon development. It also promotes reforestation, addressing the increased risk of forest
fires, while also contributing to biodiversity conservation and sustainable tourism in a vulnerable high Andean ecosystem.
This contributes significantly to Peru’s low-GHG emissions targets and helps offset the potential environmental impacts
of related initiatives (Subcomponent 2.3). All interventions are included as Universally Aligned (UA) with the Paris
Agreement and require no further risk assessment. Low mitigation risks are associated with infrastructure work under
Subcomponents 1.1, and 1.2 which seek to improve the accessibility, attractiveness and safety of different tourism
destinations. Risks will be reduced through measures to increase energy efficiency, such as the use of renewable energy
and LED lighting in buildings to reduce energy consumption, the use of fans and natural ventilation, and the use of
materials that are manufactured locally and sustainably, whenever possible.

60.
Assessment and reduction of adaptation risks. The main climate and natural hazard risks to the operation include
heavy rains, flooding, and landslides, in addition to high seismic activity. To address this, Subcomponent 1.2 will enhance
the structural integrity and resilience of temples throughout the valley, helping to prevent the collapse of cultural
heritage sites—an outcome that would significantly impact tourism and community cohesion.  Additionally, under
Subcomponent 1.1, the renovation of tourist sites—including trekking paths and viewpoints—will enhance their
resilience to floods, landslides and earthquakes, thereby improving safety for visitors. The remaining activities under
Subcomponents 2.1 and 2.2 are aimed at increasing the resilience of tourism destinations. Subcomponent 2.1 addresses
the vulnerability of transportation infrastructure to floods and landslides, which are exacerbated by climate change and
impede access to tourism destinations while Subcomponent 2.2 promotes resilience against floods by providing sewage
systems and wastewater treatment facilities across the tourism corridor which avoid waste contamination in local land,
rivers and lakes.

STRENGTHENING OF THE PRIORITY TOURISM DESTINATION
AREQUIPA-COLCA IN PERU (P511489)
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

Page 20

Official Use Only
B. Fiduciary
61.
Financial management (FM). An FM Assessment was performed in accordance with OP/BP 10.00 and the “FM
Manual for World Bank (WB) Investment Project Financing Operations” (September 7, 2021), to evaluate the adequacy
of the FM arrangements for the implementation of the project. Given the lack of experience of the PIU with World Bank
or other multilateral-financed projects, targeted capacity building and training in World Bank FM procedures will be
required. Based on the assessment performed, the proposed FM arrangements (detailed in the detailed FM assessment)
are considered acceptable, subject to the successful implementation of agreed mitigating measures.

62.
FM risk and mitigation measures. The overall residual FM risk, after considering proposed mitigation measures,
is rated as Substantial. The FM risks and related mitigation measures are described below.
•
Delayed recruitment of FM staff. To manage this risk, terms of reference for all the FM positions including the
FM specialist (as key staff) will be prepared by the PIU in a timely manner, and all the FM staff shall be appointed
within two months after effectiveness.
•
Budget allocation and execution delays. In Peru, initial project implementation phases often experience delays
in budget allocation and low budget execution rates, which could affect project readiness and disbursement. To
mitigate this risk, GORE Arequipa will initiate the process for budget allocation for both external and local
resources immediately upon loan signing, with procedures detailed in the Project Operational Manual (POM).
•
Potential inaccuracies in accounting and financial reporting. Inadequate experience with Bank-financed projects
may result in errors in financial records and reporting. Therefore, the national accounting system (SIAF) will be
used for all project transactions, supplemented by annual independent audits in accordance with Bank
requirements.
•
Unclear internal coordination and roles within the PIU. To manage this risk, the PIU shall ensure that all FM
aspects indicated in the POM will be prepared in a timely manner. In addition, the POM will include the definition
of clear roles and responsibilities, including: (i) the minimum financial management procedures according to WB
requirements, (ii) the identification of key controls, (iii) and accounting and reporting systems that will support
project activities.
Procurement
63.
Project procurement will follow the World Bank’s ‘Procurement Regulations for IPF Borrowers’, issued in July
2016, updated to September 2025, for the supply of goods, works, non-consulting services and consulting services. For
activities subject to International Open Competitive Procurement, the Borrower will use World Bank’s Standard
Procurement Documents. For activities subject to National Open Competitive Procurement, the Borrower will use
procurement documents acceptable to the World Bank.

64.
GORE’s Área de Logística (Logistics office), which reports to the Regional Administration Area, will be
responsible for the project's procurement. It prepared the Project Procurement Strategy Document (PPSD) to identify
the procurement operational environment and the appropriate approaches to address it. It is expected that the Project
will not involve high-value procurement activities. It primarily includes small infrastructure works related to roads, water
and sanitation, and cultural heritage preservation sites in various locations. Some interventions may involve particular
procurement conditions—for instance, the design for Mirador de la Cruz del Condor under subcomponent 1.1.
Additionally, the project will involve the procurement of goods and non-consulting services, as well as consultancy
services aimed at enhancing tourism management and promotion, environmental conditions, and project management.
The initial draft PPSD defines a fit-for-purpose approach for the activities under each component, considering the
operational environment and market characteristics, and will be further refined once the PIU is in place. Civil works are
expected to follow the current reference market approach thresholds applicable in Peru. For the preparation of bidding

STRENGTHENING OF THE PRIORITY TOURISM DESTINATION
AREQUIPA-COLCA IN PERU (P511489)
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

Page 25

Official Use Only
  ANNEX 1. RESULTS FRAMEWORK

 @#&OPS Doctype OPS dynamics@padannexresultframework#doctemplate

Program Development Objective Indicators
Program Development Objective(s)

The PDO is to improve the quality of tourism infrastructure and services, the conditions of natural and cultural heritage sites, and to increase sustainable
tourism activity in the Arequipa-Colca corridor.

PDO Indicators by PDO Outcomes
Baseline
Closing Period
Arrivals at lodging establishments at Arequipa region
Arrivals to lodging establishments in the Arequipa region (Number of people)
Dec/2024
Dec/2031
1,661,466
2,200,000
➢a. Domestic visitors at lodging establishments in the Arequipa region (Number of people)
Dec/2024
Dec/2031
1,207,036
1,600,000
➢b. Foreign visitors at lodging establishments in the Arequipa region (Number of people)
Dec/2024
Dec/2031
454,430
600,000
People benefiting from improved access to sustainable transport infrastructure and services
Direct users that benefit from improved access to sustainable transport infrastructure and services (Number)
Dec/2024
Dec/2031
819,160
992,281
Number of tourism and cultural heritage sites rehabilitated.
Number of tourism and cultural heritage sites rehabilitated. (Number)
Dec/2025
Dec/2031

STRENGTHENING OF THE PRIORITY TOURISM DESTINATION
AREQUIPA-COLCA IN PERU (P511489)
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

Page 26

Official Use Only
Intermediate Indicators by Components
Baseline
Closing Period
1. Improve the quality of selected tourism attractions and services
1.1 Direct jobs in the tourism sector in the Arequipa region (Number)
Dec/2024
Dec/2031
105,365
125,000
➢Percentage of jobs in tourism in Arequipa held by women (Percentage)
Dec/2024
Dec/2031
46%
50%
1.2 Cultural sites rehabilitated (Number)
Dec/2024
Dec/2031
1.3 Selected tourism sites (natural and archeological sites, viewpoints, etc.) with improved public tourist services (Number)
Dec/2024
Dec/2031
2. Upgrade roads and investment in water, sanitation and health facilities
2.1 Rural roads improved with climate resilient features and incorporation of road safety measures (Kilometers)
Dec/2024
Dec/2031
63.97
2.2 Urban roads and streets in selected sites are revamped and their walkability is improved (Number)
Dec/2024
Dec/2031
2.3 Water and sewage systems in selected towns are improved (Number)
Dec/2024
Dec/2031
2.4 Yura health center constructed and equipped (Yes/No)
Dec/2024
Dec/2031
No
Yes
2.5 Reforestation of Bosque de Quenua is completed (Yes/No)
Dec/2024
Dec/2031
No
Yes
3. Transversal Support Activities - Institutional Strengthening
3.1 Arequipa-Colca tourism marketing plan designed (Yes/No)

STRENGTHENING OF THE PRIORITY TOURISM DESTINATION
AREQUIPA-COLCA IN PERU (P511489)
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

Page 27

Official Use Only
Dec/2024
Dec/2031
No
3.2 Tourist information web platform designed and operational (Yes/No)
Dec/2024
Dec/2031
No
Yes
3.3 Trained individuals from the administration (public officials and staff) and stakeholders organizations (Number of people)
Dec/2024
Dec/2031
➢3.3.a Trained public officials and staff - Women (Number of people)
Dec/2024
Dec/2031
➢3.3.b Trained public officials and staff - Men (Number of people)
Dec/2024
Dec/2031
➢3.3.c Trained representatives of stakeholder organizations - Women (Number of people)
Dec/2024
Dec/2031
➢3.3.d Trained representatives of stakeholder organizations - Men (Number of people)
Dec/2024
Dec/2031
3.5 Inter-institutional coordination meetings held during the period by the Steering and Advisory Committees of the project (Number)
Dec/2024
Dec/2031
➢3.5a Number of meetings held by the Steering Committee (Number)
Dec/2025
Dec/2031
➢3.5b Number of meetings held by the technical committee (Comite Consultivo) (Number)
Dec/2025
Dec/2031
3.4 Percentage of project-related grievances addressed by the PIU (Percentage)
Dec/2025
Dec/2031
4. Project implementation unit
No indicators have been added.

STRENGTHENING OF THE PRIORITY TOURISM DESTINATION
AREQUIPA-COLCA IN PERU (P511489)
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

Page 28

Official Use Only
Monitoring & Evaluation Plan: PDO Indicators by PDO Outcomes
 1. Number of tourism and cultural heritage sites rehabilitated
Cultural heritage sites rehabilitated (Number)
Description
Measures the number of cultural heritage sites rehabilitated under the project and formally accepted as completed, in
line with approved designs, safeguards, and quality standards.
Frequency
Semi-annual (Semester)
Data source
PIU reports
Methodology for Data
Collection
Reports on specific interventions completed created by the PIU in coordination of the targeted sectors (tourism,
culture, health, environment, transport, water, environment)
Responsibility for Data
Collection
•
 Primary data producer: PIU, in coordination with specific sectors (tourism, culture, health, environment,
transport, water, environment)
•
Sectoral consolidation and validation: MINCETUR

 2. People benefiting from improved access to sustainable transport infrastructure and services
Direct users that benefit from improved access to sustainable transport infrastructure and services (Number of people)
Description
The direct users are the number of people that directly benefit from the improvement and rehabilitation of road
infrastructure. Roads are improved to make them all season roads. The indicator counts the expected users that will
benefit from a paved, resilient and safe road, which will lead to a benefit in vehicle operating cost and travel time
savings. The current and projected traffic were collected from the 'estudios de perfil', using the annual median daily
traffic (IMD). The traffic mix of each road was then multiply by an occupancy factor.
To estimate the passengers, the following assumptions were made:
1. Vehicle type: from the mix presented in the pre-investment studies, except for Yura and Maca-Lari.
2. Baseline and projected traffic comes from the pre-investment studies. Based on the expected construction timeline,
Year 5 projections were used for Geiser Pinchollo, Chivay -Sibayo and San Juan de Tarucani. For Uyupampa-Yura, Year
2 projections were used. For Maca-Lari, the traffic counts are considered as the similar road in the same area
(Pinchollo).
3. Occupancy factors: (a) Motorcycle 1, (b) vehicle/pick up 1.5, (c) rural minibus 8,  (d) bus 12, (e) large bus 17, and (f)
trailers 1.  (Source: JICA study for Lima, and project in Guayas, Ecuador)
Current traffic in all roads is 388 vehicles daily (indice medio diario anual), and it is expected that once roads are
completed will have 625 vehicles in total (indice medio diario anual).
Frequency
Semi-annual (Semester)
Data source
Report on Traffic Counts and occupancy factors.
Methodology for Data
Collection
Conduct traffic counts following the directive of the Ministry of Transport and Communications (link), and the above
methodology to convert to annual passengers.
Responsibility for Data
Collection
PIU with the support of the Gerencia de Transporte

3. Arrivals to lodging establishments in the Arequipa region
Arrivals to lodging establishments in the Arequipa region (Number of people)
Description
Measures the total number of tourist arrivals at lodging establishments in the region of Arequipa. The indicator will be
the total of:
•
1.a Domestic tourists visiting lodging establishments
•
1.b Foreign tourists visiting lodging establishments
Frequency
Semi-annual (Semester)
Data source
 Conducted by INEI. Administered by MINCETUR through the Monthly Tourism Survey for Lodging Establishments
(Encuesta mensual de turismo para establecimientos de hospedaje).
Methodology for Data
Collection
Arrivals are counts of guests (not room nights) checking into registered lodging establishments in 4 categories: Hotel,
Apart-Hotel, Hostal and Albergue. The geographic scope will correspond to the Arequipa region. Data will be

STRENGTHENING OF THE PRIORITY TOURISM DESTINATION
AREQUIPA-COLCA IN PERU (P511489)
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

Page 29

Official Use Only
disaggregated by residency of origin (domestic vs. foreign). The indicator excludes lodging out of registered
establishments (such as rental homes, AirBnB, etc) in the absence of monitoring mechanisms for these types of
lodging. Data is collected through a mandatory form sent to registered establishments. Non-compliance is subject to
fines (link).
Responsibility for Data
Collection
•
Primary data producer: INEI (Monthly Tourism Survey for Accommodation Establishments)
•
Sectoral consolidation and validation: MINCETUR

Monitoring & Evaluation Plan: Intermediate Results Indicators by Components
 1. Improve offering and quality of selected tourist attractions and services
Direct jobs created in the tourism sector in Arequipa region (Number)
Description
Total number of direct jobs in tourism in the region of Arequipa formal and informal, with a sub-indicator on the
percentage of jobs in tourism in Arequipa held by women. Jobs and women participation are a result of all project
components combined.
Frequency
Semi-annual
Data source
INEI
Methodology for Data
Collection
INEI National Household Survey (ENAHO). Selecting ISIC codes based on UNWTO 10 ISIC codes categories for tourism
sectors
Responsibility for Data
Collection
PIU
Rehabilitated cultural sites (Number)
Description
Measures the number of cultural heritage sites rehabilitated under the project and formally accepted as completed, in
line with approved designs, safeguards, and quality standards.
Frequency
Semi-annual
Data source
PIU reports
Methodology for Data
Collection
Reports on specific interventions completed created by the PIU in coordination of the targeted sector (Tourism,
Culture)
Responsibility for Data
Collection
PIU
Selected tourism sites (natural and archeological sites, viewpoints, etc.) with improved public tourist services (Number)
Description
Measures the number of public tourist service facilities at project-supported destinations that have been improved
and commissioned for use, meeting agreed service standards.
Frequency
Semi-annual
Data source
PIU reports
Methodology for Data
Collection
Reports on specific interventions completed created by the PIU in coordination of the targeted sector (Tourism,
Culture)
Responsibility for Data
Collection
PIU

2. Upgrading roads and investing in water, sanitation and health facilities
2.1 Rural roads improved with climate resilient features and incorporation of road safety measures (Kilometers)
Description
Measures the total kilometers of targeted rural road links improved and/or rehabilitated to agreed technical
standards and commissioned, with road safety features incorporated (e.g., signage, markings, guardrails, speed
calming at settlements, safe crossings) as per design. Roads are constructed with climate resilience measures that
account for local climate hazard exposure, incorporating appropriate engineering and non-engineering solutions to
ensure year-round transitability, including slope stabilization works, properly sized culverts for flood management,
comprehensive drainage systems, erosion control measures, etc. Counted upon completion, incluing road safety
audit, and final acceptance of works.
Frequency
Semi-annual
Data source
PIU reports

STRENGTHENING OF THE PRIORITY TOURISM DESTINATION
AREQUIPA-COLCA IN PERU (P511489)
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

Page 30

Official Use Only
Methodology for Data
Collection
Reports on specific interventions completed created by the PIU in coordination of the targeted sector
Responsibility for Data
Collection
PIU
2.2 Urban roads and Streets in selected sites are revamped and their walkability is improved (Number)
Description
Counts the number of urban blocks or city street corridors improved under the project and commissioned for public
use, meeting agreed functionality, quality, and safety standards (e.g., carriageway/sidewalk rehabilitation, drainage,
intersections, traffic calming, pedestrian facilities, lighting where applicable)
Frequency
Semi-annual
Data source
PIU reports
Methodology for Data
Collection
Reports on specific interventions completed created by the PIU in coordination of the targeted sector
Responsibility for Data
Collection
PIU
2.3 Water and sewage systems in selected towns are improved (Number)
Description
Measures the number of sanitation and drinking water infrastructure schemes constructed or rehabilitated and
commissioned, meeting technical and service standards (functionality, quality/compliance, safe access) with an O&M
arrangement in place
Frequency
Semi-annual
Data source
PIU reports
Methodology for Data
Collection
Reports on specific interventions completed created by the PIU in coordination of the targeted sector
Responsibility for Data
Collection
PIU
2.4 Yura health center constructed and equipped (Yes/No)
Description
Counts the number of health center facilities rehabilitated or improved for service delivery per approved design and
standards, including completion of civil works, installation of core utilities, etc
Frequency
Semi-annual
Data source
PIU reports
Methodology for Data
Collection
Reports on specific interventions completed created by the PIU in coordination of the targeted sector
Responsibility for Data
Collection
PIU
2.5 Reforestation of Bosque de Queñua is completed (Yes/No)
Description
Measures the number of forest ecosystem rehabilitation sites implemented and verified as meeting restoration
milestones
Frequency
Semi-annual
Data source
PIU reports
Methodology for Data
Collection
Reports on specific interventions completed created by the PIU in coordination of the targeted sector
Responsibility for Data
Collection
PIU

 3. Institutional strengthening
3.1 Arequipa-Colca tourism marketing plan designed (Yes/No)
Description
Counts the marketing plan for the Arequipa-Colca destination that is completed to agreed content standards and
formally approved by the designated authority.
Frequency
Semi-annual
Data source
PIU reports
Methodology for Data
Report from PIU/GERCETUR

STRENGTHENING OF THE PRIORITY TOURISM DESTINATION
AREQUIPA-COLCA IN PERU (P511489)
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT

Page 31

Official Use Only
Collection
Responsibility for Data
Collection
PIU
3.2 Tourist information web platform designed and operational (Yes/No)
Description
Binary indicator that the destination information web platform is built to specification and operational for public
accessibility
Frequency
Semi-annual
Data source
PIU reports
Methodology for Data
Collection
Report from PIU/GERCETUR
Responsibility for Data
Collection
PIU
3.3 Trained individuals from the administration (public officials and staff) and stakeholders organizations (Number of people)
Description
Counts unique individuals trained through project-financed trainings across the 11 investments described (culture,
transport, sanitation, health, environment). Training may include O&M, service standards, safety/maintenance,
administration, and stakeholder capacity. Disaggregated by:
•
3.3a Trained public officials/staff (women)
•
3.3b Trained public officials/staff (men)
•
3.3c Trained stakeholder organization representatives (women)
•
3.3d Trained stakeholder organization representatives (men)
Frequency
Semi-annual
Data source
PIU reports
Methodology for Data
Collection
Report from PIU with list of trainings, attendance list and training content
Responsibility for Data
Collection
PIU
3.4 Percentage of project-related grievances addressed by the PIU (Percentage)
Description
Counts the percentage of grievances addressed among the grievances received by the project  through the GRM
planned to be implemented as Borrower’s committment. In addition to the percentage, the semi-annual report will
also provide informatiopn on the number of grievances, location of their collection and main topics of grievances.
Frequency
Semi-annual
Data source
PIU reports
Methodology for Data
Collection
Report from PIU with total project grievances resolved and unresolved
Responsibility for Data
Collection
PIU
3.5 Inter-institutional coordination meetings held during the period by the Steering and consultative Committees of the project (Number)
Description
Counts the number of formal coordination meetings held by the Advisory Committee bringing together relevant
ministries and public entities to steer the program. A meeting counts if convened with quorum, agenda, and minutes
documenting decisions and follow-up. Disaggregated by:
•
3.5a Number of meetings held by the Steering Committee (Comite Directivo) (Number)
•
3.5b Number of meetings held by the consultative committee (Comité Consultivo) (Number)
Frequency
Semi-annual
Data source
PIU reports
Methodology for Data
Collection
Report from PIU with dates, attendance list and meeting minutes
Responsibility for Data
Collection
PIU
