===== SOURCE FILE: UGANDA-PAD-05252018.pdf =====

Document of
The World Bank
FOR OFFICIAL USE ONLY
Report No: PAD2716

INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION
PROJECT APPRAISAL DOCUMENT
ON A
PROPOSED CREDIT
IN THE AMOUNT OF SDR 174.6 MILLION
(US$251 MILLION EQUIVALENT)
INCLUDING US$29 MILLION EQUIVALENT
FROM THE IDA 18 SUB-WINDOW FOR REFUGEES AND HOST COMMUNITIES

AND A PROPOSED GRANT

IN THE AMOUNT OF SDR 20.2 MILLION
(US$29 MILLION EQUIVALENT)
FROM THE IDA 18 SUB-WINDOW FOR REFUGEES AND HOST COMMUNITIES

TO THE
REPUBLIC OF UGANDA
FOR THE
INTEGRATED WATER MANAGEMENT AND DEVELOPMENT PROJECT
May 23, 2018

Water Global Practice
Africa Region

This document is being made publicly available prior to Board consideration. This does not imply a presumed outcome. This
document may be updated following Board consideration and the updated document will be made publicly available in
accordance with the Bank’s Policy: Access to Information.
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized
Public Disclosure Authorized

CURRENCY EQUIVALENTS
(Exchange Rate Effective April 30, 2018)
Currency Unit =  Ugandan Shillings (UGX)
UGX 3,713 = US$1
SDR 0.69538128 = US$1

FISCAL YEAR
January 1 – December 31

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS
AC
Asbestos Cement
AfDB
African Development Bank
CBA
Cost-Benefit Analysis
CLTS
Community-Led Total Sanitation
CMO
Catchment Management Organization
CMP
Catchment Management Plan
CPF
Country Partnership Framework
CRRF
Comprehensive Refugee Response Framework
DED
Detailed Engineering Design
DP
Development Partner
DUC
Dam under Construction
DWD
Directorate of Water Development
DWRM
Directorate of Water Resources Management
EA
Environmental Assessment
FM
Financial Management
FMS
Financial Management Specialist
FSTF
Fecal Sludge Treatment Facility
EBITDA
Earnings Before Interest, Taxes, Depreciation, and Amortization
EF
Environmental Flow
ESHS
Environmental, Social, Health, and Safety
ESIA
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
ESMF
Environmental and Social Management Framework
ESMP
Environmental and Social Management Plan
FIDIC
International Federation of Consulting Engineers (Fédération Internationale des
Ingénieurs-Conseils)
GA
Gender Analysis
GBV
Gender-Based Violence
GFS
Gravity-fed Systems
GHG
Greenhouse Gas
GIZ
German Agency for International Cooperation (Deutsche Gesellschaft für
Internationale Zusammenarbeit
GoU
Government of Uganda
GRS
Grievance Redress Service
IA
Implementing Agency
IFMS
Integrated Financial Management System

IFR
Interim Financial Report
IPF
Investment Project Financing
IPILC
Integrated Program to Improve the Living Conditions
IRR
Internal Rate of Return
IT
Information Technology
IWMDP
Integrated Water Management and Development Project
IWRM
Integrated Water Resources Management
KfW
German Government-owned Development Bank (Kreditanstalt für
Wiederaufbau)
KPI
Key Performance Indicator
LVEMP
Lake Victoria Environmental Management Program
M&E
Monitoring and Evaluation
MoFPED
Ministry of Finance, Planning, and Economic Development
MoPS
Ministry of Public Service
MWE
Ministry of Water and Environment
NDP
National Development Plan
NEMA
National Environment Management Authority
NPF
New Procurement Framework
NPHC
National Population and Housing Census
NPV
Net Present Value
NRW
Non-Revenue Water
NSDS
National Service Delivery Survey
NWSC
National Water and Sewerage Corporation
O&M
Operation and Maintenance
OHS
Occupational, Health, and Safety
OP/BP
Operational Policy / Bank Policy
OPM
Office of the Prime Minister
P&CD
Planning and Capital Development
P&CDD
Planning and Capital Development Division
PAP
Project-Affected Person
PDO
Project Development Objective
PDU
Procurement Disposal Unit
PP
Procurement Plan
PPDA
Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets
PPP
Public-Private Partnership
PPSD
Project Procurement Strategy for Development
PST
Project Support Team
RAP
Resettlement Action Plan
REHOPE
Refugee and Host Population Empowerment
RfQ
Request for Quotation
RGC
Rural Growth Center
RPF
Resettlement Policy Framework
RVP
Regional Vice President
RHC
Refugee and Hosting Communities
RWSD
Rural Water and Sanitation Department
RWSS
Rural Water Supply and Sanitation

RWSSD
Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Department
SA
Social Assessment
SBD
Standard Bidding Document
SDG
Sustainable Development Goal
SDR
Special Drawing Rights
SORT
Systematic Operations Risk-Rating Tool
SPD
Standard Procurement Document
SSIP
Sector Strategic Investment Plan
STD
Sexually Transmitted Disease
STEP
Systematic Tracking of Exchanges in Procurement
TA
Technical Assistance
ToR
Terms of Reference
UBOS
Uganda Bureau of Statistics
UGX
Ugandan Shillings
UNHCR
United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees
UO
Umbrella Organization
UPMIS
Utility Performance Monitoring and Information System
UWA
Umbrella Water Authority
UWSSD
Urban Water Supply and Sanitation Department
WASH
Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene
WESLD
Water and Environment Sector Liaison Department
WESWG
Water and Environment Sector Working Group
WIS
Water Information System
WMDP
Water Management and Development Project
WMZ
Water Management Zone
WSDF
Water and Sanitation Sector Development Facility
WSS
Water Supply and Sanitation
WTP
Water Treatment Plant
WWTP
Waste Water Treatment Plant

Regional Vice President: Makhtar Diop
Country Director: Diarietou Gaye
Senior Global Practice Director: Guang Zhe Chen
Practice Manager: Catherine Tovey
Task Team Leaders: Carmen Yee-Batista, Berina Uwimbabazi

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

i
UGANDA
INTEGRATED WATER MANAGEMENT AND DEVELOPMENT PROJECT

TABLE OF CONTENTS

I.
STRATEGIC CONTEXT ...................................................................................................... 1
A. County Context ................................................................................................................. 1
B. Sectoral and Institutional Context ................................................................................... 2
C. Higher-Level Objectives to which the Project Contributes .............................................. 6
II.
PROJECT DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVES .............................................................................. 7
A. PDO ................................................................................................................................... 7
B. Project Beneficiaries ......................................................................................................... 7
C. PDO-Level Results Indicators ........................................................................................... 7
III. PROJECT DESCRIPTION .................................................................................................... 8
A. Project Components ......................................................................................................... 8
B. Project Cost and Financing ............................................................................................. 11
C. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design ................................................... 12
IV. IMPLEMENTATION ........................................................................................................ 12
A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements .......................................................... 12
B. Results Monitoring and Evaluation ................................................................................ 13
C. Sustainability .................................................................................................................. 14
D. Role of Partners .............................................................................................................. 15
V. KEY RISKS ..................................................................................................................... 15
A. Overall Risk Rating and Explanation of Key Risks ........................................................... 15
VI. APPRAISAL ................................................................................................................... 16
A. Economic and Financial (if applicable) Analysis ............................................................. 16
B. Technical ......................................................................................................................... 18
C. Financial Management ................................................................................................... 19
D. Procurement .................................................................................................................. 20
E.
Environmental and Social (including Safeguards) .......................................................... 20
F.
Climate Change Co-Benefits ........................................................................................... 24
G.
World Bank Grievance Redress .................................................................................. 25

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

ii
VII. RESULTS FRAMEWORK AND MONITORING .................................................................... 26
ANNEX 1: DETAILED PROJECT DESCRIPTION ......................................................................... 45
ANNEX 2: IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS .................................................................... 61
ANNEX 3: IMPLEMENTATION SUPPORT PLAN ...................................................................... 84
ANNEX 4: FINANCIAL AND ECONOMIC ANALYSIS ................................................................. 87

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

iii

BASIC INFORMATION
 BASIC INFO TABLE
Country(ies)
Project Name
Uganda
Integrated Water Management and Development Project
Project ID
Financing Instrument
Environmental Assessment Category
P163782
Investment Project
Financing
B-Partial Assessment

Financing & Implementation Modalities
[  ] Multiphase Programmatic Approach (MPA)
[  ] Contingent Emergency Response Component (CERC)
[  ] Series of Projects (SOP)
[  ] Fragile State(s)
[  ] Disbursement-linked Indicators (DLIs)
[  ] Small State(s)
[  ] Financial Intermediaries (FI)
[  ] Fragile within a non-fragile Country
[  ] Project-Based Guarantee
[  ] Conflict
[  ] Deferred Drawdown
[  ] Responding to Natural or Man-made Disaster
[  ] Alternate Procurement Arrangements (APA)

Expected Approval Date
Expected Closing Date
14-Jun-2018
02-Dec-2024
Bank/IFC Collaboration
No

Proposed Development Objective(s)

The PDO is to improve access to water supply and sanitation services, integrated water resources management, and
operational performance of water and sanitation service providers in Project areas.

Components

Component Name
Cost (US$, millions)

Component 1: WSS in Small Towns and RGCs and Support to Districts Hosting Refugees
 161.50

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

iv
Component 2: WSS in Large Towns and Support to District Hosting Refugee
 120.50

Component 3: Water Resource Management
  25.50

Component 4: Project Implementation and Institutional Strengthening
   5.50

Organizations

Borrower:
 Ministry of Finance, Planning and Economic Development, Uganda
Implementing Agency:
 National Water And Sewerage Corporation
 Ministry of Water and Environment

PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

SUMMARY-NewFin1
Total Project Cost
313.00
Total Financing
313.00
of which IBRD/IDA
280.00
Financing Gap
0.00

DETAILS-NewFinEnh1
World Bank Group Financing
     International Development Association (IDA)
280.00
          IDA Credit
251.00
          IDA Grant
29.00
Non-World Bank Group Financing
     Counterpart Funding
8.00
          Borrower
8.00
     Other Sources
25.00
          GERMANY: KREDITANSTALT FUR WIEDERAUFBAU (KFW)
25.00

IDA Resources (in US$, Millions)

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

vii
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60

✔

Legal Covenants

Sections and Description
Schedule 2 - Project Execution

Section I.A.1. The Recipient shall, not later than six (6) months after the Effective Date, appoint in accordance with
the provisions of Section III of this Schedule 2, and thereafter maintain at all times during Project implementation, a
Project support team (“Project Support Team”) within the MWE, consisting of a water resources management
specialist, a procurement specialist, an assistant procurement specialist, an environmental specialist, a social
specialist, a financial management specialist, an assistant financial management specialist and a monitoring and
evaluation specialist, all with qualifications, experience and terms of reference acceptable to the Association.

Section I.B.1. Subsidiary Agreement: To facilitate the carrying out of the NWSC’s Respective Part of the Project, the
Recipient shall make available part of the proceeds of the Financing allocated from time to time to the NWSC,
under a subsidiary agreement between the Recipient and the NWSC, under terms and conditions approved by the
Association (“Subsidiary Agreement”).

Section I.F.1. The Recipient shall ensure that the Project is carried out in accordance with the Safeguard
Frameworks and Safeguard Instruments.

Conditions

Type
Description
Effectiveness
(1)    The Subsidiary Agreement, in form and substance satisfactory to IDA, has been
executed on behalf of the Recipient and the NWSC;
(2)
The Recipient has prepared and adopted the Project Implementation Manual, in
accordance with the provisions of Section I.C of Schedule 2 to the FA; and
(3)
IDA is satisfied that the Recipient has an adequate refugee protection framework.

Type
Description
Disbursement
(1) Notwithstanding the provisions of Part A , no withdrawal shall be made, under Category
2, unless and until the Recipient has furnished evidence satisfactory to the Association that
NWSC has carried out the Augmented Water Supply Study for the Mbale Subproject.

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

viii
Type
Description
Effectiveness
Article V, 5.02 - The Additional Legal Matter consists of the following, namely, that the
Subsidiary Agreement has been duly authorized or ratified by the Recipient and by the
NWSC, and is legally binding upon the Recipient and the NWSC, in accordance with its terms.

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

I. STRATEGIC CONTEXT
A. County Context
1.
Uganda’s economy averaged 4.5 percent gross domestic product growth from 2011 to 2016 and
3.5 percent in 2017. The current economic slowdown is driven by adverse climate conditions, unrest in
South Sudan, private sector credit constraints, and slow execution of public sector projects. Economic
forecasts indicate that the economy will recover in 2018 and that Uganda’s oil sector and public and
private sector investments will provide the resources required for the country to reach middle-income
status by 2020.1 The most critical risk to this outlook is regional instability, particularly from the ongoing
conflict in South Sudan. An estimated one million South Sudanese refugees have already migrated to
Uganda. The continuation of this conflict could affect export earnings and place an excessive amount of
pressure on Uganda’s public services and natural resources. Other potential development constraints
include delays in capital investment programs, high population growth, limited water supply and
sanitation (WSS) infrastructure, and insufficient water resources to meet the country’s demands.
Adequate water resource management is particularly key to Uganda’s economic outlook given the
country’s dependence on agriculture (approximately 69 percent of Ugandans work in agriculture) and
recent shift toward industrialization.2
2.
Uganda has achieved remarkable results in poverty reduction, but poverty rates remain high in
the Northern and Eastern regions. From 1992 to 2013, the percentage of Ugandan households living in
poverty nearly halved.3 However, according to the Uganda Poverty Assessment Report (2016),4 in 2013
more than a third of Ugandans lived below the international extreme poverty line of US$1.90 per day.
Moreover, the risk of Ugandans falling back into poverty is high; for every three Ugandans that moved out
of poverty, two fell back into poverty. Poverty has become increasingly concentrated in Uganda’s
Northern and Eastern regions. Approximately 84 percent of Uganda’s poor (living below US$1.90 per day)
reside in the Northern and Eastern regions, where 43 percent of the residents live on less than US$1 a
day. Economic growth in these regions has been affected by the civil conflict in South Sudan, an influx of
refugees, significant land degradation, and climate change.
3.
Demographic trends and urbanization pose a daunting challenge to Uganda’s economic growth
and underscore the need for better urban planning and basic service provision. Uganda’s population of
35 million is expected to reach 80 million by 2040. Uganda’s annual urban growth rate of 5.2 percent is
among the highest in the world, and the urban population is expected to grow from 6.4 million (2014) to
22 million by 2040. About 60 percent of the current urban population, however, lacks basic amenities,
such as decent housing and WSS services. In addition, many small towns and rural growth centers (RGCs)
have emerged around the country, creating greater demand for services.5

1 Uganda Vision 2040 objective.
2 As Uganda industrializes, water resources management will be critical to ensuring steady growth of the energy, agriculture,
industry, and tourism sectors as well as to sustaining human and environmental health.
3 From 1993 to 2013, households living in poverty went from 68.1 percent to 33.2 percent.
4 World Bank, The Uganda Poverty Assessment Report 2016.
5 Small towns refer to urban centers considered town councils by the Uganda Bureau of Statistics (UBOS) with population
between 5,000 and 15,000; the rural sector includes all rural communities with a population of up to 5,000. Communities are
considered rural when they are in a rural sub-county defined by the UBOS. RGCs have a population between 1,500 and 5,000.

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

4.
Land resources, water resources, and basic services have been further strained by the influx of
refugees. Uganda is the largest refugee-hosting country in Africa and one of the top five in the world.
According to data from the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR), Uganda had the
highest number of new refugees in the world in 2016; Uganda hosted 940,835 refugees, 514,000 of whom
arrived during the second half of the year. By December 2017, the number of refugees had increased to
1.4 million. About 75 percent of these refugees are from South Sudan6 and approximately 70 percent have
settled in the West Nile area of northern Uganda, predominately in five districts (Yumbe, Arua, Moyo,
Adjumani, and Lamwo). These districts are among the poorest areas in the country and are in the early
stages of recuperating from a protracted civil conflict.
5.
Uganda has a progressive refugee policy framework that grants refugees the right to work, to
move freely, and to access Ugandan social and public services. This policy, however, places an additional
layer of stress on host communities, which are mostly poor small towns and rural areas that suffer from
inadequate infrastructure, limited social capital, low productivity, and environmental degradation due to
climatic and soil conditions. The inability to address the development needs of host communities may
undermine Uganda’s long-standing open-door refugee policy.
B. Sectoral and Institutional Context
6.
The Government of Uganda (GoU) has built a comprehensive legal and institutional framework
to improve WSS and water resources management. Uganda has a clear tariff and regulatory structure
based on socioeconomic conditions and cost recovery principles. The roles and responsibilities of
stakeholders are well defined. The Ministry of Water and Environment (MWE) is responsible for
determining priorities, setting policies and standards for water development, and regulating water
resources activities and WSS services. The National Water and Sewerage Corporation (NWSC), an
autonomous public utility owned by the GoU and positioned under the MWE, is responsible for WSS
provision in 30 large and 204 small towns.7 In small towns and rural areas that are not served by the
NWSC, local authorities (town councils), with the support of the MWE, are responsible for WSS service
delivery. The town councils act as water service providers (water authorities) and can elect to provide
service directly, utilize community-based organizations, or employ private companies. The MWE provides
the water authorities with support through its Water and Sanitation Sector Development Facilities
(WSDFs) that provide financing and guidance for the design and implementation of WSS systems and
through six regional umbrella organizations (UOs) that provide high-level assistance on operation and
maintenance (O&M) related activities. The UOs are limited guarantee companies that have successfully
provided technical, managerial, and financial management (FM) support to water authorities since 2001.
Currently, the UOs receive subsidies from the GoU and development partners (DPs) to conduct these
activities.
7.
In the early 1990s, the GoU implemented significant policy reforms, including the
commercialization and modernization of the NWSC. These reforms, coupled with significant capital

6 The number of refugees has increased to 1.4 million as of December 2017, of which 52 percent are characterized by women
and girls and 61 percent by children under 18 years. Approximately 75 percent of the refugees originate from South Sudan; 17
percent from the Democratic Republic of Congo; and 3 percent from Burundi, Somalia, and other countries.
7 Large urban towns are cities and municipalities defined as urban centers by the UBOS’ National Population and Housing
Census (NPHC). Urban centers include all areas gazetted as city, municipality, town council by the UBOS.

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

investments, have led Uganda to remarkable improvements in water supply service provision, especially
in urban areas where coverage increased from 43 percent in 1990 to 77 percent in 2017.
8.
The GoU has adopted an integrated water resources management (IWRM) approach as part of
its water sector reform program, but more needs to be done to consolidate and fully implement IWRM
across the country. IWRM is a critical part of the country’s strategy to ensure water security given current
climate variability and climate change. Since the early 2000s, the sector has taken important steps to build
an appropriate policy and institutional framework for IWRM. The MWE established four deconcentrated
Water Management Zones (WMZs) to guide the development and implementation of an IWRM approach
at the regional level. The MWE, with the participation of multiple stakeholders, has developed water
resources strategies for three of the four WMZs and catchment management plans (CMPs) in identified
hot spot sub-catchment areas.8 The current focus of the MWE is to consolidate and fully implement IWRM
across the country by strengthening strategic planning instruments, improving information systems, and
implementing CMPs.
9.
Demographic, climate, and development trends point to increased pressure on Uganda’s water
resources. While Uganda’s per capita freshwater resource is among the highest in the world, lack of
infrastructure, climate variability, and environmental degradation hamper the country’s ability to meet
water demands. Estimates indicate that water use will triple by 2035. Although this future demand would
only constitute about a fifth of the net water available, high climate variability and underdeveloped water
resources infrastructure could result in significant water stress in areas of the country. According to the
National Water Resources Assessment (2013), only 2.8 percent of the internal renewable water resources
are currently utilized, yet almost three-fourths of districts will experience high or extreme water stress by
2035. A 2015 climate diagnostic for Uganda showed that increased temperatures would produce higher
levels of potential evapotranspiration, leading to a more arid climate throughout the country.9 At the
same time, climate change is expected to result in more intense precipitation that is likely to lead to
damaging and life-threatening floods over the next 10 years.10 These climate hazards entail significant risk
to water resources and to WSS infrastructure.
10.
Despite considerable progress in the WSS sector, Uganda still faces challenges to improve WSS
delivery in small towns and RGCs, ensure water security, and provide adequate sanitation in large
towns. National water supply coverage levels (77 percent in urban areas and 67 percent in rural areas)
mask disparities in service quality between urban and small towns/rural areas. In urban areas, 48 percent
of households use piped water, but that number falls to 33 percent in small towns and to 9 percent in
rural areas. Most of the country relies on community point sources.11 Despite an acceptable level of
functionality of water systems (80 percent in rural and small towns), many people still travel long distances
to fetch water. Populations with insufficient potable water oftentimes use unsafe water sources,
triggering cholera, typhoid fever, and diarrhea outbreaks as well as adverse social consequences, such as

8 There is an emerging recognition that catchment management activities form an integral part of cost-effective WSS service.
For instance, water source protection is included in all water supply projects to ensure quality and quantity of water resources.
The MWE is strengthening its data collection and analysis capabilities to ensure that decision making is based on scientific
analysis and informs investments and water resources-related policies.
9 World Bank. 2015. “Uganda Climate Profile.”
10 Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery. Thinkhazard.com. http://www.thinkhazard.org/en/report/253-uganda
(accessed February 7, 2018).
11 Point sources include community systems operated by hand pump boreholes or protected springs.

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

sexual and domestic violence.12 In the districts hosting refugees, water demand far exceeds available
water supply. The poor location of boreholes, frequent pump breakdowns, and distribution challenges in
scattered refugee zones compromise water service and supply. The UNHCR relies on water trucking, a
very expensive option,13 to meet the minimum water demands (20 L per person per day).
11.
Sanitation coverage poses another significant challenge. The United Nations Joint Monitoring
Program reports that only 29 percent of the urban and 17 percent of the rural populations have access to
individual improved sanitation facilities. Sewerage coverage is less than 7 percent in large towns and
negligible in small towns. The low sanitation coverage indicates poor on-site sanitation conditions from
unlined public and household toilets and inadequate wastewater treatment and fecal sludge
management. In refugee settlements, sanitation coverage is low given insufficient pit latrines14 and
communal sanitation facilities. These deficiencies have caused severe water pollution and related
environmental and public health issues.
12.
In response to these challenges, the GoU has developed programs and policies focused on
improving WSS services in poor small towns and RGCs. Since the early 2000s, the GoU has supported the
introduction of private operators to manage piped water systems in small towns through management
contracts with local governments (town councils). Despite success with this private delivery model, scaling
up has been difficult, and the GoU has opted to apply a clustering (regionalization) service delivery
approach in which the NWSC assumes management responsibility.15 Since 2014, the MWE has transferred
service responsibility for 204 small towns to the NWSC.16 The small towns managed by the NWSC have
experienced marked improvement in revenue collection, network expansion, and service quality. The GoU
plans to continue transferring small towns to the NWSC as long as it is technically and financially viable
for the corporation. When it is not feasible, the MWE will transfer management responsibility of piped
WSS systems to the regional UOs.17 The GoU’s decision to move forward with this ‘umbrella approach’
was made after careful consideration of options with DPs and stakeholders. The German Technical
Cooperation’s study on the ‘Reorganization of Water Supply and Sewerage Service Areas in the Urban
Water and Sanitation Sub-sector’ ultimately informed the approach. The MWE is currently developing
guidelines for the UOs to direct and streamline their operation and to establish a specific tariff structure.
In August 2017, the MWE appointed six regional UOs (Northern, Midwestern, Karamoja, Southwestern,

12 The MWE commissioned a Gender Impact Study of the Water and Sanitation Sub-Sector in March 2017. The study showed
that women and girls are vulnerable to sexual violence when they travel distances to fetch water.
13 Trucking cost ranges from UGX 300,000 to UGX 500,000 per trip. Water trucking is usually intended for the initial phase of a
humanitarian emergency to meet minimum water demands of refugee settlements. However, water trucking currently
accounts for over 30 percent of the total water supply in refugee settlements. This percentage surges past over 50 percent in
some districts in West Nile.
14 Per the 2017 UNHCR WASH Gap Analysis, sanitation coverage in the West Nile is about 34 percent. Sanitation coverage at
household level in heavily districts hosting refugees such as Yumbe, Arua, and Moyo is 24 percent, 22 percent, and 6 percent,
respectively.
15 Challenges from the private delivery model include (a) high investment needs due to significant infrastructure backlogs, (b)
difficulties attracting private operators to work in poor and challenging districts coupled with unattractive contract conditions,
and (c) weak regulatory measures to monitor and evaluate performance.
16 The MWE has followed clear and transparent guidelines and procedures for the transfer process, which begins with a formal
request from local government units and is followed by a due diligence assessment and approval by the NWSC’s management.
Once the NWSC takes responsibility for the service, the NWSC’s financial, commercial, and technical systems will be applied in
the small towns.
17 In accordance with the findings of the Reorganization of Water Supply and Sewerage Service Areas in the Urban Water and
Sanitation Sub-Sector in Uganda, Phase II - Preferred Option Report, December 2016.

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

Central, and Eastern) as Umbrella Water Authorities (UWAs) in charge of 71 small towns (about 10 small
towns per UWA). To date, the UWAs have performed relatively well with average revenue collection rate
and non-revenue water (NRW) at 75 percent and 29 percent, respectively. Financial data indicate that the
Northern Umbrella and the Midwestern Umbrella service 2,809 and 2,387 active connections,
respectively, and collected UGX 27.5 million and UGX 33.6 million in October 2017, respectively. Their
O&M costs for October 2017 were UGX 16.3 million and UGX 27.1 million, respectively.18 While the UWAs
can cover their routine O&M costs, they are still dependent on public financing for capital investments
and for providing assistance on O&M related-activities to other local water authorities. The Project’s
financial analysis, however, indicates that the GoU’s policies will enable the UWAs to reach cost recovery
in five years.
13.
Among other new approaches, the GoU launched a comprehensive water supply program for
RGCs that includes the adoption of solar technology for pumping and community involvement in system
design/operations. For sanitation in small towns and RGCs, the MWE is focused on implementing
sanitation monitoring and behavior change approaches, including (a) Community-Led Total Sanitation
(CLTS) and sanitation marketing; (b) construction of on-site sanitation facilities in public markets and
schools; and (c) construction of fecal sludge treatment facilities (FSTFs). More attention needs to be given
to the full sanitation service chain to ensure human waste is contained, conveyed, treated, and
reused/disposed of safely and sustainably. DPs, including the World Bank, are providing technical
assistance (TA) to the MWE to improve fecal sludge management.
14.
The GoU has also prioritized basic infrastructure investments in several large towns in the
Northern and Eastern regions to achieve more integrated and balanced economic development. The
NWSC and the MWE are prioritizing WSS investments in the municipalities of Gulu and Mbale, given their
contributions to the country’s economy and their water security issues. Gulu Town, the economic capital
of the Northern region is experiencing an average population growth of 5.2 percent per year.
Nevertheless, at least 70 percent of Gulu’s population lives below the poverty line and only 4 percent of
the town is reported to have access to piped water. Moreover, the town is susceptible to dry spells and
has experienced severe water shortages. The critical water supply situation in Gulu is the result of two
decades without infrastructure investments because of the civil unrest. Further to the east, Mbale, a
coffee-producing area, is dubbed the business hub of eastern Uganda; its proximity to Kenya allows for
easier trade. Economic opportunity in the town has spurred migration, which in turn has triggered rapid
population growth and the development of new settlements that are stretching the capacity of current
service providers (town councils and the NWSC).
15.
The GoU, UNHCR, and other DPs have come together to provide a more comprehensive
development response to WSS delivery challenges in districts hosting refugees. Uganda is one of the few
countries in the world that is piloting the UNHCR’s Comprehensive Refugee Response Framework
(CRRF).19 Uganda has developed a multi-stakeholder Refugee and Host Population Empowerment
(REHOPE) Strategic Framework to harmonize development approaches and programming among
partners. Improving WSS service delivery in the West Nile districts hosting refugees is key to delivering on

18 Running O&M consists of operator remuneration, energy, chemicals, and routine maintenance.
19 The CRRF aims to provide a more predictable and sustainable response that benefits districts hosting refugees by linking
humanitarian and development efforts early on. The CRRF strengthens inclusive service delivery while calling for more robust
and expanded planning and opportunities for durable solutions and includes a ‘whole of society’ approach, involving a broad
range of actors and new partnerships.

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

the CRRF and REHOPE agenda. At a recent Water, Sanitation, and Hygiene (WASH) stakeholder forum, a
consensus was reached between the UNHCR, Office of the Prime Minister (OPM), and MWE that
humanitarian assistance should transition from emergency response toward long-term sustainable
development solutions. In that context, given that refugees in settlements currently do not pay for water,
the UNHCR and OPM are collaborating with the MWE on designing a new water tariff policy for refugee
settlement areas.
16.
The World Bank is well positioned to support the water sector program in Uganda and has a
long history in the Ugandan water sector. The World Bank recently financed the Lake Victoria
Environmental Management Project Phase II (LVEMP II, P100406) and is currently financing the Water
Management and Development Project (WMDP, P123204). These projects finance major water-related
investments in priority urban areas and various measures to improve IWRM planning and development.
The World Bank also has experience in the rural sector through the Uganda Water Small Towns and RGCs
(P102462), which provided TA and capacity building for the development of the water sector. The
proposed Integrated Water Management and Development Project (IWMDP, the Project) builds on the
achievements of the WMDP, paying special attention to the vulnerable Northern and Eastern regions,
districts hosting refugees, and areas with low WSS coverage.
C. Higher-Level Objectives to which the Project Contributes
17.
The proposed Project will support the GoU’s Vision 2040, which aims to transform Uganda into
a modern and prosperous country. The Second National Development Plan (NDP II), which is aligned with
Vision 2040, focuses on promoting inclusive economic growth and achieving the United Nation’s
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), including SDG #6, ‘Ensure availability and sustainable
management of water and sanitation for all’’. The NDP II also identifies the following priority actions: (a)
increasing the stock and quality of strategic infrastructure to accelerate the country’s competitiveness;
(b) engaging human capital development; (c) strengthening mechanisms for quality, effective, and
efficient service delivery; and (d) improving refugee management and host community development.
Water is at the center of the NDP II, which highlights interventions focused on (a) improving WSS services
in priority, northern large towns envisioned as economic regional hubs; (b) expanding WSS access to the
poor and vulnerable in underserved areas, including districts hosting refugees; and (c) strengthening
water sector institutions to improve IWRM and service delivery.
18.
The Project also supports the GoU’s strategy, as documented in the NDP II, CRRF, and REHOPE,
for a holistic and sustainable development approach for refugee management and host communities.
The GoU’s primary focus is to complement humanitarian aid with long-term development investments for
districts hosting refugees to address the needs of refugees while building resilience in the host
communities. To that end, the Project will focus on the most vulnerable districts hosting refugees in the
West Nile and Northern region and support long-term WSS investments in infrastructure development,
planning at the district level, and capacity building to enable the local governments to better promote
sustainable development and peaceful cohabitation within districts hosting refugees.
19.
The Project is consistent with the World Bank’s 2016–2021 Country Partnership Framework
(CPF) (Report No. 101173-UG, discussed by the Executive Directors on April 21, 2016). The Project
directly supports ‘Objective Four: Enhanced Resilience of the Poor and Vulnerable’ by improving access
to WSS services in districts hosting refugees and other vulnerable towns and rural areas as well as

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

implementing CMPs focused on protecting water sources and agriculture production against droughts and
floods, environmental degradation, and other impacts of climate change. The Project also directly
supports ‘Objective Six: Improved Access to Urban Services’ by financing WSS investments to improve
coverage, quality, and efficiency of service in prioritized large and small towns.
20.
The Project supports achievement of the World Bank’s twin goals of eliminating extreme
poverty and promoting shared prosperity. Investments in water infrastructure act as catalysts for local
development and economic activity. Bringing higher quantities and more reliable water to households
enhances quality of life by (a) reducing the time and effort to collect water—a task that women and
children are usually responsible for; (b) reducing the incidence of waterborne diseases; and (c) diminishing
absenteeism from work and school and the associated lost income and opportunity costs. In addition, the
Project will assist in improving IWRM and bringing WSS services to the residents of the underserved and
vulnerable Northern and Eastern regions.
II. PROJECT DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVES
A. PDO
21.
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve access to water supply and sanitation
services, integrated water resources management, and operational performance of water and sanitation
service providers in Project areas.
B. Project Beneficiaries
22.
The Project expects to benefit approximately 1,403,000 people (including 99,000 refugees,
173,000 hosting community citizens, and 716,000 females) with increased access to improved WSS
services. The Project will increase the availability of safe drinking water, reduce the distance people must
travel to access safe WSS systems, secure water sources to ensure sustainable supply, and improve
sanitary conditions at the household and community levels. Local communities will also benefit from
catchment management activities focused on building capacity for modern land use management and
improved agroforestry farming practices. The Project will also strengthen the resilience of the systems to
water-related shocks. Service providers (UWAs and the NWSC) and their staff will benefit from TA and
investments focused on strengthening their financial and operational performance. In addition, local
communities and regional and local organizations will be empowered to identify, prioritize, and support
investments in water-related infrastructure and services. See Annex 1 for additional information.
C. PDO-Level Results Indicators
23.
PDO indicators for the proposed Project include the following:
•
Direct Project beneficiaries (number), of which female (percentage) and refugees
(percentage)20

20 Direct beneficiaries that are receiving a direct benefit from water supply investments, sanitation investments and water
resources measures.

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

•
Area under integrated water resources management in selected catchments supported by
the Project (ha)21
•
Percentage of the service areas achieve cost recovery ratio of 1.1 by the Project22
•
People provided with access to improved water sources (number)
•
People provided with access to improved water sources (number), of which female,
refugees, and citizens in host communities (number)
•
People provided with access to improved sanitation services (number), of which female,
refugees, and citizens in host communities (number)
III. PROJECT DESCRIPTION
A. Project Components
24.
The Project will support WSS infrastructure investments in small towns located primarily in
Uganda’s Northern and Eastern regions and in RGCs in the country’s Central and Midwestern regions. The
water resources activities are designed to consolidate IWRM in overall water sector planning and
infrastructure development. Specific water resources measures will be conducted in the Upper Nile and
Kyoga WMZs where CMPs have been prepared for sub-catchments and where most of the WSS
infrastructure investments proposed under this Project are located. The Project will integrate
infrastructure investment, water source and catchment protection measures, and comprehensive
sanitation planning to ensure sustainability and increased resilience to climate change and variability. The
Project will provide TA aimed at consolidating water sector reforms to support efficient and effective
service delivery models for small towns and RGCs.
25.
With financing from the IDA 18 Sub-Window for Refugees and Host Communities (RHC), the
Project will support activities designed to improve the sustainable provision of WSS services to host
communities and refugee settlements focusing on the districts of Yumbe, Arua, Moyo, Adjumani in the
West Nile and Lamwo in the Northern Region, where about 70 percent of the refugees in Uganda are
being hosted, as well as the Mid-west district of Kiryandongo, which is currently experiencing large inflows
of refugees from South Sudan.
26.
The Project includes the following four components. Annex 1 presents a detailed Project
description.
Component 1: Water Supply and Sanitation in Small Towns and Rural Growth Centers and Support to
Districts Hosting Refugees (US$161.5 million, of which national IDA US$114.5 million, IDA 18 Sub-

21 Area refers to the size of land under improved water/land management, including but not limited to farms, river banks,
catchments/micro catchments, intakes, and so on. Measures include soil and water conservation, flood protection,
afforestation, and livelihood improvement schemes as per agreed CMPs.
22 Cost recovery ratio is the ratio of revenues collected over operating expenses for the selected service areas supported under
the Project.

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

Window for RHC US$43.0 million (including IDA credit US$21.5 million and US$21.5 million IDA grant),
and counterpart funds US$4.0 million)
Subcomponent 1.1: Support to Small Towns and Rural Growth Centers
27.
This subcomponent will support activities to improve WSS in selected small towns and RGCs 23 in
the Recipient’s territory. Activities consist of (a) constructing and rehabilitating WSS facilities, as well as
providing associated services, including engineering, environmental and social studies, and supervision of
construction activities; (b) preparing and implementing sanitation plans in selected small towns; (c)
strengthening the capacity of selected UWAs24 in the areas of operational and financial management,
including the establishment of a remote monitoring system for rural water systems; and (d) carrying out
environmental and social management-related activities to protect water sources and sensitize
communities.
Subcomponent 1.2: Support to Districts Hosting Refugees
28.
This subcomponent will support activities to improve WSS in selected districts hosting refugees.
Activities consist of (a) constructing and rehabilitating WSS facilities, as well as providing associated
services, including engineering, environmental and social studies, and supervision of construction
activities; (b) preparing and implementing sanitation plans; (c) strengthening the capacity of selected
UWAs in the areas of operational and financial management, including the establishment of remote
monitoring system for rural water systems; (d) carrying out environmental and social managementrelated activities to (i) protect water sources and sensitize communities; and (ii) address the specific needs
of host communities and refugees; and (e) strengthening the capacity of the MWE to develop and carry
out WSS sector policies and programs that promote more sustainable and efficient service delivery at
refugee settlements.
Component 2: Water Supply and Sanitation in Large Towns and Support to Districts Hosting Refugees
(US$120.5 million of which national IDA US$77.5 million, IDA 18 Sub-Window for Refugees and Host
Communities US$15.0 million (including US$7.5 million IDA credit and US$7.5 million IDA grant),
counterpart funds US$3.0 million, and KfW US$25.0 million)
Subcomponent 2.1: Water Supply and Sanitation in Large Towns

29.
This subcomponent will support activities to improve WSS. Activities consist of (a) constructing
and rehabilitating WSS infrastructure in the municipality of Mbale, including implementing the
recommendations from the Augmented Water Supply Study; (b) constructing water supply system for the
municipality of Gulu25; (c) undertaking construction supervision activities and engineering, as well as

23 Small towns mean any of the following areas of the Recipient’s territory: Busia, Namungalwe-Kaliro, Kyegegwa-MparaRuyonza, Namasale, and Butaleja- Busolwe and Budaka - Kadama-Tirinyi-Kibuku. RGCs means any of the following areas: Kasese
cluster (Kyarumba, Kyondo, Lake Katwe, and Kisinga); Bitsya -Kurungu; and 30 RGCs benefiting from solar-powered piped water
systems.
24 Selected UWA refer to five regional UWA (Northern, Midwestern, Southwestern, Central, and Eastern) appointed as the
water authorities in charge of specific water and sanitation service areas as gazetted by the MWE on July 14, 2017 (The Uganda
Gazette, Volume CX No. 39).
25 The Gulu Water Supply subproject includes a parallel financing with Kreditanstalt für Wiederaufbau (German Government-

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

environmental studies, including the Augmented Water Supply Study; (d) strengthening the capacity of
the NWSC in the areas of operational and financial management to support improved performance in the
project supported areas; and (e) carrying out environmental and social management-related activities
with a view to protecting water sources and sensitizing communities.
Subcomponent 2.2: Support to Districts Hosting Refugee
30.
This subcomponent will support activities to improve WSS in Adjumani District.26 The activities
consist of: (i) constructing and rehabilitating WSS facilities, as well as providing associated services,
including engineering, environmental and social studies and supervision of construction activities; (ii)
preparing and implementing sanitation plans; and (iii) carrying out environmental and social management
related activities to protect water sources and sensitize communities.
Component 3: Water Resources Management (US$25.5 million of which national IDA US$25.0 million
and counterpart funds US$0.5 million)
31.
This component will support catchment management and restoration activities in selected subcatchments. Activities consist of (a) undertaking catchment management measures, including soil and
water conservation, river bank protection and restoration; and (b) providing alternative livelihoods for
affected communities.
32.
This component also supports IWRM into the GoU’s Water and Environment Sector. Activities
consist of (a) preparing a water resources strategy for the Albert WMZ;27 (b) preparing CMPs and related
technical studies for priority sub-catchments; (c) undertaking a national groundwater management study;
and (d) strengthening water resource monitoring and information systems, including (i) the installation of
Water Information System (WIS) at the national and WMZ levels; (ii) the installation of hydrologic
monitoring systems; and (iii) the rehabilitation of the National Water Quality Reference Laboratory.
Component 4: Project Implementation and Institutional Strengthening (US$5.5 million of which
national IDA US$5.0 million and counterpart funds US$0.5 million)
33.
This component will finance Project implementation and coordination support activities.
Activities consist of (a) coordinating, planning, monitoring, reporting, and supervision of the Project; (b)
providing training to implementing agencies (IAs) (MWE and NWSC) on World Bank FM, procurement,
environmental and social policies and procedures; and (c) establishing the Project Support Team (PST).

owned Development Bank - KfW) Development Bank to finance the water intake, water source protection, and WTP. The KfW
credit to the NWSC has been approved.
26 Adjumani District” means the towns of Adjumani, Pakele, Ciforo and Dzaipi, as well as the parishes of Agojo and Mungula.
27 Uganda is divided into four WMZs—the Upper Nile, Kyoga, Albert, and Victoria. The current WMDP has focused mainly on
two zones—the Upper Nile and Kyoga WMZs—while the LVEMP II has focused on the Victoria WMZ. The proposed Project will
provide support for the Albert WMZ, which lies in the western part of Uganda and is characterized by a high topography as well
as a high potential for hydropower generation and water supply through GFS.

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

34.
The component will also support institutional strengthening activities, including (a) preparing a
WSS sector financing study to support the implementation of the Recipient’s Sector Strategic Investment
Plan (SSIP) and (b) strengthening the MWE’s regulatory functions at the regional level.
B. Project Cost and Financing
35.
The Project’s estimated cost is US$313 million. IDA will provide Project financing in an amount
equivalent to US$280 million, of which US$70 million will be used to finance the subcomponents
supporting districts hosting refugees (1.2 and 2.2). The IDA 18 Sub-Window for RHC (US$29 million credit
and US$29 million grant) and national IDA (US$12 million) will finance Subcomponents 1.2 and 2.2. The
GoU will be responsible for providing US$8 million in counterpart financing to cover a portion of operating
costs, the acquisition of land, and any compensation due to people affected by the Project. The KfW
Development Bank will finance US$25 million of the new water supply scheme in Gulu under Component
2.28 Table 1 provides a summary of the cost estimates and proposed financing arrangements.
Table 1. Project Cost Estimates and Financing
Project Description
Total
Project
Cost
Total
IDA
Amount
IDA 18
National
Credit
IDA 18
RW
Credit
IDA 18
RW
Grant
Counter
part
Funding
KfW for
Gulu
Component 1: WSS in Small
Towns and RGCs and Support to
Districts Hosting Refugees
161.5
157.5
114.5
21.5
21.5
4.0

1.1 Support to Small Towns and
RGCs
108.0
105.5
105.5

2.5

1.2 Support to Districts Hosting
Refugees
53.5
52.0
9.0
21.5
21.5
1.5

Component 2: WSS in Large
Towns and Support to Districts
Hosting Refugee
120.5
92.5
77.5
7.5
7.5
3.0
25.0
2.1 WSS in Urban Large Towns
102.5
74.5
74.5
0.0
0.0
2.5
25.0
2.2 Support to Districts Hosting
Refugees
18.5
18.0
3.0
7.5
7.5
0.5

Component 3: Water Resources
Management
25.5
25.0
25.0
0.0
0.0
0.5

Component 4: Project
Implementation and
Institutional Strengthening
5.5
5.0
5.0
0.0
0.0
0.5

Total Project Costs
280.0
222.0
29.0
29.0
8.0
25.0

36.
The lending instrument is an Investment Project Financing (IPF) that will support a six-year project
implemented by two IAs, the MWE and the NWSC. Selection of the IPF instrument was based on the IPF’s
flexibility and suitability to incorporate financing for a broad range of activities, including several specific

28 The US$25 million comes from a KfW credit, which has already been approved by the Parliament.

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

investments, TA, and capacity enhancement measures. The Borrower will be the GoU for the full IDA
amount.
C. Lessons Learned and Reflected in the Project Design
37.
The proposed Project design draws valuable lessons from ongoing operations in Uganda and the
World Bank’s global experience in small towns and rural areas. The lessons from the ongoing WMDP and
LVEMP-II indicate the need to pay closer attention to effectiveness delays and slower-than-desired
implementation due to limited readiness at appraisal. See the ‘Key Risks’ section for more detail on how
this lesson is incorporated in the Project design. The Project also incorporates lessons from Uganda’s
significant experience in solar technology, including engaging experienced engineering firms and
embedding capacity building and community consultation in the design and operation of solar-powered
piped water schemes projects. Leveraging the World Bank’s global experience, the Project design reflects
lessons learned from West Africa on private sector involvement and Latin America on the Rural Water and
Sanitation Information System (Sistema de Información de Agua y Saneamiento Rural).
38.
The Project also leverages lessons learned from experience in implementing WASH projects,
especially the importance of ensuring proper coordination with humanitarian agencies and national and
local governments. In Uganda, a lack of coordination resulted in boreholes being drilled too close to each
other or too close to shallow pit latrines, risking contamination of the groundwater and open water
sources used by the refugee settlements and host communities. Taking these past issues into account,
the proposed Project emphasizes the importance of having coordination mechanisms in place with
participation from stakeholders at all levels.
39.
The World Bank’s global experience highlights the close link between stakeholder engagement
throughout the project cycle and the ultimate effectiveness and sustainability of the project. To ensure a
sense of ownership and commitment in the beneficiary communities, the Project will promote community
participation through consultations before and during implementation. Beneficiary communities will be
involved in selecting sites, setting tariffs, and collecting fees. The Project will also support special programs
to raise community awareness on the importance of safe drinking water, source protection, and proper
sanitary practices. The Project will ensure women’s participation in these programs, given that the burden
of an inadequate water supply falls most heavily upon their shoulders, and will include measures to
prevent Gender-based Violence (GBV) derived from the World Bank’s global experience. Furthermore, the
Project will actively empower communities by setting up local supervision committees to oversee
construction and O&M post Project.
IV. IMPLEMENTATION
A. Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
40.
The Project will use the same implementation arrangements as the WMDP, which utilizes
existing GoU systems and structures. The MWE and the NWSC are the lAs for the IWMDP. The relevant
departments of the IAs will be responsible for operational-level activities, including coordination, FM,
monitoring, and supervision of their respective component activities. The MWE’s Urban Water Supply and
Sanitation Department (UWSSD) and Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Department (RWSSD) will have
overall responsibility for Component 1, the NWSC through its Planning and Capital Development Division

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

(P&CDD) for Component 2, the MWE’s Directorate of Water Resources Management (DWRM) for
Component 3, and the MWE’s Department of Commissioner Water and Environment Sector Liaison
Department (WESLD) for Component 4. The MWE and the NWSC will appoint focal points to oversee
implementation of the main activities. These focal points will report directly to department heads on
implementation progress. The existing decentralized management structures (WMZs, NWSC town offices,
and UWAs) and local governments will support the IAs in their efforts to deliver outputs in each of the
Project areas. The implementation arrangements are considered adequate. Under the WMDP, the NWSC
and the MWE (UWSSD, DWRM, and WESLD) satisfactorily implemented WSS and water resources
activities and accumulated extensive experience with World Bank implementation procedures. However,
both IAs have experienced some weaknesses on procurement and contract management (refer to
paragraph 70). The MWE’s RWSSD recently implemented a large rural water supply project funded by the
African Development Bank (AfDB). The NWSC has a close working relationship with the MWE that will
enable synchronization in the implementation of related activities. In addition, the Project will support
the hiring of key personnel and provide training to build implementation capacity. A detailed
implementation arrangement description is provided in Annex 2.
41.
As the NWSC is a corporation with its own identity, it will sign a subsidiary agreement with the
Ministry of Finance, Planning, and Economic Development (MoFPED) to facilitate Project implementation.
The agreement will specify the amount to be allocated to the NWSC to undertake specific activities under
Component 2 and will define the terms and conditions. The signed subsidiary agreement is a condition of
effectiveness.
42.
Coordination mechanisms. Given the number of departments (the MWE’s UWSSD, RWSSD,
DWRM, and WESLD, and the NWSC’s P&CDD) involved in the Project, the MWE’s WESLD will take the
responsibility for overall coordination and communication. The WESLD will liaise with the different
implementation teams to coordinate planning, reporting, supervision, and oversight across departments
involved in the Project. The WESLD will engage a PST comprising key technical specialists (for example,
water resource management specialist, safeguards, monitoring and evaluation (M&E), procurement, and
FM specialists) to assist the MWE and NWSC’s focal points. The PST will provide support to the WESLD,
assisting all Project implementation departments, units, and agencies to carry out specialized tasks. The
PST will also be responsible for consolidating plans, developing budgets, monitoring results, compiling
reports, and disseminating outputs and outcomes. For the implementation of the districts hosting refugee
subcomponent, the MWE will liaise with the OPM and UNHCR to ensure a coordinated response to
refugee inflow, resettlement, and protection issues.
43.
The Water and Environment Sector Working Group (WESWG) and relevant governing bodies (for
example, the NWSC Board of Directors) will provide high-level operational and policy guidance to ensure
that the Project components and activities are implemented as intended. The WESWG members include
leaders from the MWE, the NWSC, and other line ministries as well as all DPs who are active in the water
and environment sector. The WESWG will facilitate coordination of Project activities with other DPs who
are supporting complementary activities.
B. Results Monitoring and Evaluation
44.
The IAs will be responsible for monitoring and reporting. The MWE and the NWSC will lead data
collection and compilation analysis. An integrated M&E system will be developed and implemented as

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

part of the Project to support implementation and reporting. Monitoring and reporting will focus on key
performance data from specific Project activities that contribute to the Project’s intermediate results and
PDO-level outcomes. The MWE will submit progress reports every semester to the World Bank. A midterm
review will be carried out to evaluate implementation progress and identify potential issues in need of
attention and resolution. An end-of-project evaluation will also be conducted two months before Project
closing to assess whether the intermediate results and PDO-level indicators were achieved, the
sustainability of the results, and lessons learned.
C. Sustainability
45.
The Borrower’s commitment is ensured by the strong alignment between the Project’s
investments and national- and institutional-level strategies. The Project is supporting the implementation
of Sector Development Plan (2015/2016–2019/2020), which was the result of a comprehensive planning
process that included consultation and coordination with national, regional, and local authorities and key
DPs. The water resources investments were designed with sustainability in mind; the investments directly
support the existing institutions (the MWE and WMZs) in carrying out their mandates and strengthening
stakeholder-based institutions such as the Catchment Management Organizations (CMOs). The Project
will enhance the capacity of the MWE, WMZs, and CMOs to improve the catchment action planning
process, support the implementation of priority investments and studies, develop a functional WIS, and
maintain databases and analytical tools that enable water resources to be used optimally and sustainably.
The MWE is committed to providing adequate funding for the O&M of these institutions over the long
term through annual budgetary provisions that will ensure adequate financing for staff, equipment, and
other logistics needs. The catchment management measures, as well as other water resources activities,
are essential to safeguarding the future quantity and quality of water sources and adapting to climate
change.
46.
To ensure the sustainability of the Project’s infrastructure investments and the services they
provide, the Project supports the implementation of sustainability-focused service management models.
The NWSC will continue managing the large towns of Gulu and Mbale, as well as Adjumani Town. The
MWE will transfer management responsibilities for Busia, Mbale small towns, and Namungalwe-Kaliro
under Component 1 to the NWSC after completion of the works. The UWAs will manage RGCs and two
small towns (Kyegegwa-Mpara-Ruyonza and Namasale). The UWAs and the NWSC will apply a clear tariff
regulatory structure based on the residents’ socioeconomic conditions, cost recovery principles,
professionalized commercial operations, and pro-poor measures. The financial assessment indicates that
the NWSC and the UWAs will be able to achieve full cost recovery. The Project will finance targeted
activities to build UWAs’ capacity to sustainably carry out their new direct management responsibilities,
which include contract management of private operators, asset management, and revenue collection. The
MWE also has ongoing efforts to strengthen its regulatory functions to improve supervision of service
delivery providers and to enforce action when underperforming. In addition, the Project will explore the
possibility of utilizing professionalization contracts under which a private firm would be contracted to help
the UWAs implement and assimilate standard operating procedures and systems (for network,
commercial, administrative, and FM aspects).
47.
To promote sustainability of the Project’s investments in the districts hosting refugees, the MWE
is collaborating with the UNHCR to develop new water policies for refugee settlements. The new policies
will consist of (a) requiring that refugees begin paying for water once they are settled and engaged in

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

from reductions in prices currently paid for water; reductions in time spent fetching water; and overall
improvements in health, quality of life, and the environment. The World Bank team conducted a costbenefit analysis (CBA) for a large sample of interventions under Components 1 and 2 to evaluate the
Project’s development impact. Investment costs of Components 3 and 4 were added proportionally, given
their importance to the successful implementation of the interventions. The CBA also used the shadow
price of carbon to value the net greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions generated or reduced by the Project.
Assuming a social discount rate of 6 percent29 and a 20-year asset life of the water supply systems, the
estimated economic rate of return is 17 percent and the net present value is US$144 million. Taken
individually, each analyzed intervention indicated returns higher than 12.5 percent. The Project’s expected
return is higher than the 6 percent discount rate, providing a strong rationale for IDA financing for these
investments.
58.
A financial evaluation was conducted specifically for the NWSC. Results from the financial
analysis show that overall the NWSC performed well on operational and financial indicators over the last
five years. The NWSC achieved reductions in NRW, universal micro-metering, and high revenue collection.
Moreover, the NWSC’s financial statements show net profit in the range of 3- 10 percent of operating
revenues from 2012 to 2016. In the NWSC’s service areas, the GoU has a strong policy for setting uniform
tariffs that are above the average operating costs and adjust automatically to currency fluctuations. The
tariffs are set to cover operational costs, depreciation and some minor investments. The financial
projections indicate that the NWSC has the capacity to take over the O&M of the WSS systems in the
proposed areas. In some cases, however, small towns that are or will be part of the NWSC’s service area
have higher than average operating costs. Given this situation, the financial viability of the NWSC depends
on (a) the automatic adjustment of tariffs in accordance with the NWSC’s total average operating costs and
(b) effective and efficient maintaining of operational performance in the new service areas.

59.
A financial evaluation of the UWA model was also conducted utilizing different tariff and
operation scenarios in five RGC subprojects. Results show that if the GoU maintains its current policy of
full cost recovery tariffs, the systems will be financially sustainable. Several of the systems will show
operating losses in the first years of operation, but these losses will gradually decrease as production
increases. By 2025, all the systems will show profits high enough to offset previous losses. The final figures
will depend on actual costs and actual tariffs in each of the UWAs. The financial analysis indicates that to
ensure the sustainability of works, the UWA guidelines for setting tariffs should stipulate that (a) the tariff
must fully cover operating costs and leave a margin of at least 25 percent for better management and
investments; (b) tariffs must adjust automatically to cost variations; (c) efficiency gains must be required in
operation and revenue collection; and (d) management contracts with mechanisms to ensure compliance
must be signed with water scheme operators.

60.
Affordability. Results also show that the expected tariffs are affordable given that they will be at
levels similar to current tariffs. The water bill will correspond to about 5 percent of average household
income, and bills will be far lower than prices currently paid to satisfy water needs.

61.
Maximizing the Finance for Development approach. The financial assessment and the
operational performance review indicate that the NWSC has great potential to leverage commercial
financing. The NWSC, however, is hesitant to take on additional debt given that its projected cash flow is

29 Recommended in World Bank guidelines for WSS projects.

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

earmarked for implementing a 10-year capital investment plan, which includes an aggressive program to
take over the management of 500 small towns. Under the capital investment plan, the NWSC is committed
to finance (a) about 60 percent of the small-town program; (b) implementation of RAPs and network
connections for major capital investments financed by DPs; and (c) minor rehabilitation and refurbishment
of water systems. The World Bank will provide TA through a Public Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility
grant to conduct a pre-feasibility study to further analyze the NWSC’s financial situation, potential to
sustain commercial financing, and capacity to identify opportunities to crowd in new finance.
B. Technical
62.
The Project design represents a technically sensible approach to improve access to WSS systems
in the targeted areas. The proposed interventions are based on master plans, which define priority
investments and include preliminary feasibility studies and detailed engineering designs (DEDs). The
proposed technology, which includes gravity-fed systems (GFS), solar-powered piped water systems,
wastewater treatment lagoons, FSTFs, and on-site sanitation facilities for public institutions are
considered adequate to achieve drinking water, wastewater effluent, and service delivery standards. The
MWE, through a project financed by the AfDB, successfully implemented 35 solar water systems. Under
the Project, however, the MWE plans to scale up use of solar panels. To ensure sustainability and adequate
implementation of the systems, the MWE will retain the services of an experienced consulting firm to
develop technical designs and an operational manual. The firm will also carry out training to ensure that
the systems are properly designed and that the key actors (the MWE, service providers, and water
committees) have adequate capacity to maintain them. Regarding the FSTSFs, it is critical that the Project
considers the full sanitation service chain (container, collection and treatment, and disposal/reuse) and
analyzes the possibility of clustering with other service areas to bring economies of scale. The Project will
prioritize those FSTFs with sound feasibility studies and will invest in sanitation assessments to support
future investments in FSTFs.

63.
The World Bank team has reviewed and approved detailed designs for the Mbale and Busia small
town subprojects. For all other subprojects, experienced consulting firms will conduct feasibility studies
and develop detailed designs, which will follow the MWE’s engineering design and level of service
provision standards. The WSS solutions are expected to be similar to those that the NWSC and the MWE
are already implementing in Uganda. The Project will also include a comprehensive review of the current
state of sanitation in the targeted areas through the preparation of sanitation plans that assess on-site
and centralized fecal sanitation. The regionalization of service delivery through the NWSC and the UWAs
is considered adequate, and the Project includes a series of activities to support the strengthening of the
UWAs, such as NRW reduction and asset management. The Project will also build on Uganda’s good
practices and successes, including the use of delegated management contracts, specialized private
operators in some cases, and performance-based targets.

64.
The Project’s approach for the water resources activities is technically sound and consistent with
good practice and experience elsewhere in Africa and globally. The watershed management measures are
based on sound CMPs that were developed with stakeholder participation and guided by the MWE’s
Catchment Planning Guidelines. In addition, the Project will incorporate adequate water source
identification and protection planning in its water supply system designs through the application of the
MWE’s Water Source Guidelines. Feasibility studies will also include yield studies to ensure that boreholes
and surface water have adequate capacity to withstand long-term water demands. In addition, the Project

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

will support a comprehensive and widely accessible WIS and a groundwater management tool kit for
Uganda. These tools will not only strengthen water resources investment, planning, and management at
the catchment level but will also increase access to improved data and related analytical tools that will
help the country build its resilience to increased climate variability and improve its capacity for strategic
investment and decision making.

65.
A high-level screening for climate change and disaster risks was done as per requirements for the
Project’s three investment components. The identified risks included extreme temperature which will
likely trigger an increase in potential evapotranspiration, an increase in the annual variability of
precipitation and extreme precipitation events, which in turn are likely to cause floods that can be
hazardous to local communities, livestock and hinder agricultural activities. To address these risks, the
Project (Components 1, 2, and 3) includes source protection measures such as restoration of riverine
vegetation, reforestation, and buffer zone protection that will help reduce effects of flooding and protect
the surrounding environment. These practices will also help increase groundwater recharge and ground
cover, which reduces evapotranspiration rates and helps conserve water resources. The Project will
undertake further consultations with the relevant stakeholders to ensure that the design of the water
infrastructure considers the associated risks.
C. Financial Management
66.
The MWE has a fully functioning Accounts Department headed by the Assistant Commissioner of
Accounts. The MWE has an Internal Audit Unit that includes four internal auditors from the MoFPED. This
unit reports to an audit committee at the MoFPED. The Project’s activities and transactions implemented
by the MWE will be approved and authorized by the MWE’s Permanent Secretary who is the Accounting
Officer. The main accounts of the MWE are computerized with Integrated Financial Management Systems
(IFMS). However, this system is currently only operational for government funds as the project module is
not yet fully operational. As a result, project financial reports cannot be generated directly from the IFMS.
67.
For the NWSC, the Project’s transactions will be managed within the existing set-up of the NWSC.
The Managing Director, who is the Accounting Officer, will approve and authorize activities and
transactions implemented by NWSC. All transactions will be processed in accordance with the NWSC’s
policies and procedures. The NWSC has a fully functional Finance and Accounts Department headed by
the Deputy Managing Director for Finance and Corporate Strategy. The Accounting Unit of the NWSC is
computerized with Iscala accounting systems. The NWSC also has an Internal Audit Department
comprising qualified and experienced auditors and an audit committee of the board is in place. The
Auditor General will audit the Project’s financial statements in accordance with statutory requirements,
auditing standards, and suitable terms of reference (ToR).
68.
The financial implementation arrangements, which are currently in place under the WMDP, are
considered acceptable. Both the MWE and the NWSC have sound internal control procedures in place.
However, the following key risks have been identified based on the ongoing WMDP: (a) ministry internal
audit review reports are not shared regularly with the World Bank; this is risky given the number of
ongoing activities and spread of operations where such reviews give management needed assurance of
fiduciary status; (b) the project module of the IFMS has not been fully operationalized at the MWE, which
increases the risk of errors and inaccuracy of financial reports; and (c) turnover of qualified and
experienced staff is noticed. To ensure that the Project is effectively implemented, the MWE and NWSC

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

agreed to undertake actions to mitigate the identified risks, including maintaining appropriate staffing
arrangements throughout the life of the project. The FM arrangements for the Project have an overall
Moderate risk rating.
D. Procurement
69.
Procurement under the proposed Project will be conducted in accordance with the World Bank’s
‘Procurement Regulations for IPF Borrowers’ (Procurement Regulations), dated July 2016 and revised in
November 2017, under the New Procurement Framework (NPF) and with the World Bank’s Guidelines on
Preventing and Combating Fraud and Corruption in Projects Financed by IBRD Loans and IDA Credits and
Grants, dated July 1, 2016.
70.
Project Procurement Strategy for Development (PPSD). To improve Project implementation and
to achieve results, the IAs prepared a PPSD and developed a Procurement Plan (PP) based on the PPSD for
the first 18 months of Project implementation. A summary of the PPSD is included in Annex 2, Box 2.1 and
the risk assessment included below takes in consideration the PPSD’s findings.
71.
Procurement capacity risk assessment. A procurement capacity assessment of the MWE and
NWSC undertaken in March and April 2018 established that both agencies have assigned teams to
implement the IWMDP. The MWE and the NWSC have recent experience implementing IDA funds through
the WMDP. Both IAs demonstrated moderate to acceptable levels of procurement and contract
management and staff deployment, but weakness (indicated in key issues in the next paragraph) resulted
in multiple amendments during contract implementation resulting in cost and time overruns. The MWE
team that initially handled the contract management stage was replaced in November 2017 due to noted
weakness. In the MWE, the team assigned to the Project is the same team in charge of contract
management for the WMDP, which will have some benefits albeit currently limited experience from the
WMDP. The MWE also has a new department (rural) that will be implementing an IDA finance project for
the first time. The NWSC team is composed of staff who implemented the WMDP and new technical and
procurement staff that have not worked on IDA funded projects before. The necessary risk mitigation
measures, capacity building, and procurement systems enhancement measures for Project
implementation were agreed upon and included in the PPSD.
72.
The key issues and risks. The main risks at the MWE and the NWSC are (a) delayed construction
and underestimation of the cost of works; (b) incomplete needs assessments and inadequate attention to
geotechnical studies leading to design changes/variations during implementation; (c) limited capacity of
domestic contractors to conduct projects of this nature, complexity, and scope;30 (d) delays in preparing
specifications, statement of requirements, and ToRs by the IAs; (e) Procurement Disposal Unit (PDU) staff
requirement of additional training on World Bank Procurement Regulations and Procedures; (f)
inefficiency in processing, causing delays at each stage of the procurement cycle; (g) gaps in contract
management skills;31 and (h) time and cost overruns during contract implementation. In addition, the
MWE faces the following risks: (a) limited office space for PDU staff and inadequate storage capacity for
procurement records;32 (b) several departments have not implemented IDA projects before; and (c) delays

30 Thus, most of these will be done by international firms.
31 Including delays in preparing contract implementation reports and lack of monitoring of vendor’s performance.
32 Records stored on top of desks, cupboards, and on the floor.

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

in paying vendors due to prolonged internal approval processes. Based on the key issues and IA
assessment, the Project’s procurement risk rating is High.
73.
Risk mitigation measures. The mitigation measures include (a) detailed designs of up to US$50
million for works that are already in place and others that are ongoing; (b) geotechnical studies for each
of the proposed works and complete needs assessments at the feasibility study stage; (c) packaging to
consider capacity of potential contractors, market sounding, as well as multi-modal or wider dissemination
of bidding opportunities to elicit participation from capable providers; (d) training to build the capacity of
the PDU and departments without earlier experience on World Bank procurement processes; (e) training
on International Federation of Consulting Engineers (Fédération Internationale Des Ingénieurs-Conseils -
FIDIC)33 contracts and contract management in general; (f) contract management plans to ensure
readiness for contract management, including on-site presence; and (g) contracting allowing for more
mobilization time. For the MWE, additional mitigation measures include (a) provision of adequate space
for record keeping and (b) regular monitoring by management to ensure timely payment to vendors and
fluid implementation. The residual risks after the implementation of the mitigation measures is
Substantial.
E. Environmental and Social (including Safeguards)
74.
The Project is assigned an Environmental Assessment (EA) Category B given that significant
adverse environmental and social impacts are not expected due to the nature of the proposed activities.
This conclusion was based on a thorough review of specific subprojects (Mbale WSS, Busia WSS, and Gulu
Water Supply) and the environmental and social screening of potential subprojects conducted under the
ESMF. The anticipated negative impacts are expected to be localized, site-specific, and ranging from small
to moderate in scale. For instance, in the Mbale and Busia subprojects (projects with detailed designs),
significant impacts are not expected from (a) surface water abstraction on downstream users and
ecological biota because minimum environmental flow (EF), as in the case of Namatala River, will be
maintained through augmentation of the source and/or reducing the water services to an acceptable
level; (b) biosolids generation and treated wastewater discharges on water quality and land degradation;
and (c) influx of labor in Project areas. The same nature and scale of impacts are anticipated in Gulu and
in other future subprojects. On the Gulu subproject, the assessment concluded that the Gulu intake will
not rely on the performance of the Karuma Dam (a large dam currently under construction). The Project
is not anticipated to generate any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts, as none of
the planned Project activities will be located in environmentally sensitive areas. All Project negative
impacts are expected to be mitigated with known technology, good practices and management solutions
that will result in residual impact of minor significance. The Project triggers safeguards policies on
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12), Safety of Dams (OP/BP
4.37), Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50), Forests (OP/BP 4.36), Natural Habitats (OP/BP
4.04), and Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11). See Annex 2 for additional information on project
category, safeguards assessment and instruments, and IAs’ capacity.

75.
As most of the locations/sites of the subprojects have not yet been identified, the MWE has
prepared framework documents in a consultative manner. These include (a) an ESMF to ensure that a
process of identifying, assessing, and mitigating environmental and social impacts is integrated in the

33 FIDIC is an international standards organization for the consulting engineering and construction.

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

development of the specific subprojects and (b) an RPF to clarify the principles and legal and institutional
procedures for resettlement and rehabilitation to be applied to investments. The ESMF and RPF have been
prepared in accordance with the World Bank’s Operational Policy on Safeguards, including the World Bank
Industry-Specific Water and Sanitation EHS Guidelines and improved requirements on Environmental,
Social, Health, and Safety (ESHS) applicable for works contracts, as well as the requirements of the Uganda
National Environment Management Authority (NEMA) and National Land Commission. These documents
have been consulted upon, approved by the World Bank and disclosed in-country and on the World Bank’s
external website (ESMF on March 22 ,2018 and RPF on March 13, 2018).
76.
The client prepared DEDs and feasibility studies for two subprojects: Mbale WSS (including
cluster towns) under Component 2 and Busia WSS under Component 1, including specific
ESIA/Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) and RAP which have been consulted upon and
approved by the World Bank. These documents have been consulted upon, approved by the World Bank
and disclosed in-country and on the World Bank’s external website (Mbale RAP and Busia RAP on April 26,
2018, Mable ESIA on May 8, 2018, and Busia ESIA on May 3, 2018). For the Mbale subproject, before
construction, the NWSC will carry out an Augmented Water Supply Study to evaluate options to augment
water source during low flows/dry season for Namatala and assess the reliability of the proposed water
supply system.34 The study will include specific recommendations that will be implemented under the
IWMDP. Once additional subprojects complete DED/feasibility studies and their locations/sites are
identified for financing under the IWMDP, the client will prepare additional site-specific safeguards
instruments during implementation, including ESIA, ESMP, RAP, which will be consulted upon, cleared by
the World Bank, and then disclosed in-country and on the World Bank’s external website before
commencement of any civil works.
77.
Management of safeguards issues will be conducted by the two IAs (the MWE and the NWSC).
The IAs will be responsible for ensuring the preparation and implementation of safeguards instruments,
as well as overall compliance enforcement of relevant national safeguards regulations and World Bank
safeguard policies. Regional entities (WMZs, UWAs, and local governments) will support the IAs in their
efforts to implement safeguards measures. The MWE and the NWSC have satisfactorily implemented WSS
and water resources management projects with the WMDP and therefore have accumulated extensive
experience with respect to implementation of World Bank safeguards procedures. A capacity assessment
of the IAs indicates that there are dedicated and qualified staff to carry out safeguards activities, and no
additional staff is required. However, the World Bank and the IAs will monitor and assess the need for
additional staff during implementation support missions. The MWE and the NWSC will apply existing tools
to ensure that construction and supervision contracts include adequate tasks, staffing,35 and budget for
safeguards management, including occupational, health, and safety (OHS) aspects. Training programs will
be carried out to improve capacity of the IAs and supporting organizations. The Project will use existing
platforms, such as the catchment management committees and district WSS coordination committees
among others, to engage stakeholders. The ESMF includes a specific section on implementation
arrangements and capacity building with a specific training program and budget for the implementation

34 The options will include, among others but not be limited to: (a) construction of a water impoundment structure at the
Namatala intake site to store water during high flows and sustain the water demand during the dry spell; (b) construction and
rehabilitation of boreholes in the small towns; (c) expansion of Manafwa water supply system, and (d) a reduction in water service
delivery at acceptable levels. They are not considered individual solutions, but complementary and inclusive.
35 Contracts will require both the contractor and Supervising Engineer to have a Social Specialist, an Environmental Specialist,
and a Health and Safety Specialists on staff on a full-time status.

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

of safeguards instruments. Project funds will support the hiring of key personnel as well as training and
preparation of additional studies.
78.
Gender Analysis (GA). A Gender Impact Study of the Water and Sanitation Sub-Sector (March
2017), commissioned by the MWE, highlights the socioeconomic impacts of insufficient WSS facilities on
women and girls and their livelihoods.36 Women are recognized for their integral role in managing WSS
and hygiene in the household and community, as they are the primary users, collectors, transporters, and
managers of water. While women are increasingly participating in the decision-making and planning
process, more still needs to be done so their participation is mainstreamed and effective in all WSS
committees. Women and girls bear the heaviest burden for water collection.37 Long walks to water
sources trigger serious social consequences, including GBV, such as sexual assaults of women and girls,
physical and verbal abuses of women and children from husbands due to frustration from delays at water
sources, and limitations in women’s ability to engage in income-generating activities. Women are also
affected disproportionately by disease caused by unsafe water sources and poor hygiene practices and
the lack of adequate sanitation facilities, which contribute to women’s unwillingness to work outside of
their homes and girls not attending school for fear of harassments due to the lack of gender-segregated
stalls and proper menstrual hygiene management facilities. The Project will address these impacts along
with recommendations proposed by the study to alleviate GBV and improve gender mainstreaming.38 For
instance, the Project will construct infrastructure, which aims to improve accessibility to WSS, thus
reducing the overall distance that women and girls must walk for water collection. The sanitation facilities
supported by the Project will be gender segregated in schools and public spaces and will include menstrual
hygiene management and handwashing facilities for girls. TA will be provided to the IAs to strengthen
their capacity to train UWAs, community-based organizations, and local leaders on mainstreaming gender
in O&M of WSS facilities. The Project will also include community sensitization, GBV prevention, and skill
development and training activities to women to promote their participation in decision making on WSS
issues, supporting GoU’s aspiration to achieve the national target of 100 percent of WSS committees with
women in key leadership positions. In addition, the Project will support activities to improve genderspecific M&E (for example, percentage WSS committees with women in key positions39).
79.
Labor influx. The proposed project will apply upmost due diligence in the management and
monitoring of labor influx to minimize any potential GBV in Project areas. The amount of labor influx will
vary by Project components as in some areas labor influx will be minimal given that the type of work and
technology could be supplied by local workforce, while in other areas works might involve labor from
outside of project areas. The ESMF includes procedures, institutional responsibilities, and mitigation
measures for screening, assessing, and managing issues related to labor influx that will be applied to all
site-specific ESIAs. Potential preventive measures include (a) sourcing local workforce as much as possible,
provided skill sets are met; (b) actively engaging the communities, especially vulnerable groups on the
potential arrival of external workers, social conducts and behaviors, and grievance redress mechanisms;

36 A Gender Impact Study of the Water and Sanitation Sub-Sector, March 2017. This report reviewed the MWE’s progress in
implementation of the Water Sector Gender Strategy over the five-year period of 2010–2015.
37 The report indicates that over 26 percent and 14 percent of households in rural communities and RGCs, respectively, walk
over 1–2 km for water collection. In small towns, 24 percent of the households walk between 200 m and 500 m to water
sources.
38 The purpose of the gender impact study was to evaluate how well MWE implemented the Water Sector Gender Strategy and
to what extent gender has been mainstreamed into the programs at the national and local levels.
39 Key positions in WSS committees are: Chairperson, Vice Chairperson, Secretary, and Treasurer.

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

(c) including particular conditions in works contract, such as a code of conduct outlining contractor’s
responsibilities on workplace culture, labor influx management plan, and worker’s camp management
plan; (d) conducting mandatory training for all employees on legal conduct in local communities and legal
consequences for non-compliance and on ethical behavior (for example, not to engage in relationships
with underage girls and married women) as well as on issues relating to sexual exploitation and abuse,
HIV/AIDS, and sexually transmitted diseases (STDs); (e) maximizing the distance of the camp sites from
the communities and providing services and entertainments within the camps; (f) providing opportunities
for workers to regularly return to their families; (g) strengthening IAs’ capacity on labor influx
management; and (h) liaising with Ministry of Gender on community sensitization initiatives and trainings.
80.
Citizen engagement. The Project will engage participating communities throughout the Project
cycle to foster behavior change and sustainability. The MWE’s Software Steps (Steps in Implementation
of Water and Sanitation Software Activities, 2012)40 will allow for systematic application of citizen
engagement activities to ensure a sense of ownership and commitment. For instance, the Project will
actively empower communities by setting up local supervision committees to provide oversight during
construction and after completion. In the refugee settlements and host communities, stakeholder
consultations will be conducted with local leaders and community members in collaboration with the
OPM and the UNHCR to build consensus on issues and approaches for the Project. Beneficiary satisfaction
surveys, including a survey specifically for districts hosting refugees, will be conducted at the Project’s
start, midterm review, and at completion. Relevant corrective actions will be monitored over the life of
the Project. The Project will also establish a grievance redress system dedicated to addressing residents’
complaints related to the Project’s works.
F. Climate Change Co-Benefits
81.
An assessment of climate co-benefits for the Project was conducted for Components 1 to 3. A
quantitative analysis was conducted to estimate the Project’s impact on GHG emissions and to value the
externality using the shadow price of carbon (Annex 4). For each component, GHG emissions were
estimated in tCO2eq using the World Bank Water Global Practice’s GHG Accounting Excel Tool. The net
emissions of the Project were estimated at −8,124 tCO2eq. The Project's main contribution to reducing
emissions will be through replacing water supply tanker truck use with piped systems in refugee host
communities. The installation of gravity-based systems will also reduce net GHG emissions. In addition,
the installation of water supply solar systems and other energy efficiency improvement activities,
including NRW reductions, will also likely lead to reductions in GHG emissions. A qualitative assessment
of the climate mitigation and adaptation co-benefits was also conducted based on the information
available for each component. The analysis indicates that the Project has additional measures in place to
contribute to the reduction of GHG and to reduce the vulnerability of WSS systems to climate change. The
qualitative analysis is included in Annex 2.

40 The Software Steps were developed to address the concerns regarding different approaches to awareness creation and
community mobilization used in Uganda. They provide guidance on awareness creation, capacity building, and provision of
services and follow-up of communities in the water and sanitation sector. There are 19 steps, which are grouped into four phases:
(a) general planning and advocacy phase; (b) pre-construction, mobilization, and training phase; (c) construction phase; and (d)
post-construction phase. The Software Steps will be included in the ESMPs and Project Implementation Manual.

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

G. World Bank Grievance Redress
82.
Communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely affected by a World Bank (WB)
supported project may submit complaints to existing project-level grievance redress mechanisms or the
WB’s Grievance Redress Service (GRS). The GRS ensures that complaints received are promptly reviewed
to address project-related concerns. Project affected communities and individuals may submit their
complaint to the WB’s independent Inspection Panel which determines whether harm occurred, or could
occur, as a result of WB non-compliance with its policies and procedures. Complaints may be submitted
at any time after concerns have been brought directly to the World Bank's attention, and Bank
Management has been given an opportunity to respond. For information on how to submit complaints to
the
World
Bank’s
corporate
Grievance
Redress
Service
(GRS),
please
visit
http://www.worldbank.org/en/projects-operations/products-and-services/grievance-redress-service.
For information on how to submit complaints to the World Bank Inspection Panel, please visit
www.inspectionpanel.org.
.

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

VII. RESULTS FRAMEWORK AND MONITORING

Results Framework

Project Development Objective(s)

The PDO is to improve access to water supply and sanitation services, integrated water resources management, and operational performance of water and
sanitation service providers in Project areas.

RESULT_FRAME_TBL_PDO

PDO Indicators by Objectives / Outcomes
DLI CRI Unit of
Measure Baseline
End Target

To improve access to water supply and sanitation services and integrated WRM
Direct Project Beneficiaries

Number
0.00
1,403,000.00
of which female

Percentage 0.00
51.00
of which refugees

Percentage 0.00
7.00
To improve integrated water resources management;
Area under integrated water resources management in selected
catchments supported by the project

Hectare(Ha
)
0.00
47,209.00
To improve the operational performance of water and sanitation service providers
Percent of the service areas achieve cost recovery ratio of 1.1 under
the project

Percentage 38.00
80.00
To improve access to water supply and sanitation services
People provided with access to improved water sources
Yes Number
0.00
1,151,862.00
People provided with access to improved water sources - Female
(RMS requirement)
Yes Number
0.00
587,450.00

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

RESULT_FRAME_TBL_PDO

PDO Indicators by Objectives / Outcomes
DLI CRI Unit of
Measure Baseline
End Target

of which refugees

Number
0.00
98,886.00
of which citizens in host communities

Number
0.00
173,212.00
People provided with access to improved sanitation services
Yes Number
0.00
294,489.00
People provided with access to improved sanitation services -
Female (RMS requirement)
Yes Number
0.00
150,189.00
of which refugees

Number
0.00
21,087.00
of which citizens in host communities

Number
0.00
47,136.00

RESULT_FRAME_TBL_IO

Intermediate Results Indicators by Components
DLI CRI Unit of
Measure Baseline
End Target

WSS in Small Towns, RGCs, Large Towns & Support to Districts Hosting Refugees (Components 1&2)
Piped household water connections (constructed or rehabilitated)
resulting from the project interventions

Number
0.00
88,129.00
Improved community water points (constructed or rehabilitated)
under the project

Number
0.00
7,780.00
Precent of water and sanitations committees with women in key
position in project areas

Percentage 84.00
95.00
People within 200m (0.2km) of an improved water source
benefitted in refugees hosting districts

Percentage 0.00
70.00

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

of which women

Percentage 0.00
51.00
New sewerage connections resulting from the project interventions

Number
0.00
384.00
Number of service areas that reduce NRW to 20% under the project

Number
3.00
10.00
Customer satisfaction Index for services supported under the
project

Percentage 0.00
85.00
Selected service providers achieve > 80 percent in collection
efficiency under the project

Number
3.00
6.00
Volume of BOD pollution loads removed by treatment plants as
result of project interventions (Tons per year)

Number
221.00
352.00
Water Resource Management (Component 3)
Catchment and source protection plans developed

Number
5.00
16.00
National Water information systems established and
operationalized under the project

Number
0.00
1.00
State of water resources reports produced to inform decision
making

Number
0.00
3.00

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

Monitoring & Evaluation Plan: PDO Indicators

Indicator Name
Direct Project Beneficiaries
Definition/Description
Beneficiaries are people or groups who directly receive benefits from interventions of the project (water
supply, sanitation, and WRM related investments).
Frequency
Bi-annually

Data Source
Primary sources include: MWE M&E system, NWSC Area performance reports, Refugee Database and
UPMiS.  Secondary sources include: MWE/DWD/DWRM progress reports, annual water and
environments sector performance report and NWSC annual report.

Methodology for Data Collection

Responsibility for Data Collection
MWE and NWSC

Indicator Name
of which female
Definition/Description
Beneficiaries are people or groups who directly receive benefits from interventions of the project (water
supply, sanitation, and WRM related investments).
Frequency
Bi-annually

Data Source
MWE/DWD/DWRM progress reports, annual water & environments sector performance report, Water
Supply Atlas (database of water supply, functionality and distribution of all Uganda districts), NWSC
annual report and refugee database.

Methodology for Data Collection

Responsibility for Data Collection
MWE and NWSC

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

Indicator Name
of which refugees
Definition/Description
Beneficiaries are people or groups who directly receive benefits from interventions of the project (water
supply, sanitation, and WRM related investments).
Frequency
MWE and NWSC

Data Source
MWE/DWD/DWRM progress reports, annual water & environments sector performance report, Water
Supply Atlas (database of water supply, functionality and distribution of all Uganda districts), NWSC
annual report and refugee database.

Methodology for Data Collection

Responsibility for Data Collection
Bi-annually

Indicator Name
Area under integrated water resources management in selected catchments supported by the project
Definition/Description
Area is referred to the land under integrate water management measures.  Areas include but not limited
to farms, river banks, catchments / micro catchments, intakes, etc.   Measures include soil and water
conservation, flood protection, afforestation, and livelihood improvement schemes as per agreed in
CMPs.
Frequency
Bi-annually

Data Source
Primary sources include: National Water Information System database, GIS Mapping and MWE M&E
system.  Secondary sources include: MWE/DWRM progress reports and annual water & environment.

Methodology for Data Collection

Responsibility for Data Collection
MWE and DWRM

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

Indicator Name
Percent of the service areas achieve cost recovery ratio of 1.1 under the project
Definition/Description
Percent of service areas supported by the project that achieve cost recovery ratio of 1.1.  Cost recovery
ratio is the revenues collected over operating expenses for selected service areas under the project.
Baseline was derived from the existing service areas that have been gazetted: Gulu, Mbale, Adjumani,
Busia, Namasale, Kyegegwa-Mpara-Ruyonza, Namungalwe-Kaliro and Budaka-Kadama-Tirinyi-KibukuButaleja-Busolwe.
Frequency
Bi-annually

Data Source
Primary sources include: MWE M&E system, NWSC Accounting System (SCALA), Refugee Database and
UPMiS.  Secondary sources include: MWE/DWD progress reports, annual water and environments sector
performance report and NWSC annual report.

Methodology for Data Collection

Responsibility for Data Collection
MWE/DWD Rural and Urban/NWSC

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

Indicator Name
People provided with access to improved water sources
Definition/Description

Frequency
Bi-annually

Data Source
Primary sources include: MWE M&E system, NWSC Area performance reports, Refugee Database,
Refugees GIS Mapping for WASH and UPMiS.  Secondary sources include: MWE/DWD progress reports,
annual water and environments sector performance report and NWSC annual report.

Methodology for Data Collection

Responsibility for Data Collection
MWE and NWSC

Indicator Name
People provided with access to improved water sources - Female (RMS requirement)
Definition/Description

Frequency
Bi-annually.

Data Source
MWE M&E system, NWSC Area performance reports, Refugee Database, Refugees GIS Mapping for
WASH and UPMiS.  Secondary sources include: MWE/DWD progress reports, annual water and
environments sector performance report and NWSC annual report.

Methodology for Data Collection

Responsibility for Data Collection
MWE and NWSC

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

Indicator Name
of which refugees
Definition/Description
People who benefitted from improved water supply services that have been constructed or rehabilitated
under the project.   Per UNICEF-WHO Joint Monitoring Program definition, “improved water sources”
include piped household connection (house or yard connections), public standpipe, boreholes,
protected dug well, protected spring and rainwater collection, and do not include unprotected well,
unprotected spring, surface water (river, pond, dam, lake, stream, irrigation channel), or bottled water.

Frequency
Bi-annually.

Data Source
MWE M&E system, NWSC Area performance reports, Refugee Database, Refugees GIS Mapping for
WASH and UPMiS.  Secondary sources include: MWE/DWD progress reports, annual water and
environments sector performance report and NWSC annual report.

Methodology for Data Collection

Responsibility for Data Collection
MEW / NWSC.

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

Indicator Name
of which citizens in host communities
Definition/Description
People who benefitted from improved water supply services that have been constructed or rehabilitated
under the project.   Per UNICEF-WHO Joint Monitoring Program definition, “improved water sources”
include piped household connection (house or yard connections), public standpipe, boreholes,
protected dug well, protected spring and rainwater collection, and do not include unprotected well,
unprotected spring, surface water (river, pond, dam, lake, stream, irrigation channel), or bottled water.

Frequency
Bi-annually.

Data Source
MWE M&E system, NWSC Area performance reports, Refugee Database, Refugees GIS Mapping for
WASH and UPMiS.  Secondary sources include: MWE/DWD progress reports, annual water and
environments sector performance report and NWSC annual report.

Methodology for Data Collection

Responsibility for Data Collection
MWE / NWSC.

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

Indicator Name
People provided with access to improved sanitation services
Definition/Description

Frequency
Bi-annually

Data Source
Primary sources include: MWE M&E system, NWSC Area performance reports, Refugee Database,
Refugees GIS Mapping for WASH and UPMiS.  Secondary sources include: MWE/DWD progress reports,
annual water and environments sector performance report and NWSC annual report.

Methodology for Data Collection

Responsibility for Data Collection
MWE and NWSC

Indicator Name
People provided with access to improved sanitation services - Female (RMS requirement)
Definition/Description

Frequency
Bi-annually.

Data Source
MWE M&E system, NWSC Area performance reports, Refugee Database, Refugees GIS Mapping for
WASH and UPMiS.  Secondary sources include: MWE/DWD progress reports, annual water and
environments sector performance report and NWSC annual report.

Methodology for Data Collection

Responsibility for Data Collection
MWE and NWSC.

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

Indicator Name
of which refugees
Definition/Description
People benefitted from improved sanitation facilities that have been constructed or rehabilitated under
the project, including: pit latrine with slab, ventilated improved pit (VIP) latrine, composting toilet, and
flush or pour-flush toilet/latrine to piped sewer system and septic tank, and fecal sludge treatment
plants.  It also includes shared sanitation facilities built in institutions and public places.
Frequency
Bi-annually.

Data Source
Primary sources include: MWE M&E system, NWSC Area performance reports, Refugee Database,
Refugees GIS Mapping for WASH and UPMiS.  Secondary sources include: MWE/DWD progress reports,
annual water and environments sector performance report and NWSC annual report.

Methodology for Data Collection

Responsibility for Data Collection
MWE / NWSC.

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

Indicator Name
of which citizens in host communities
Definition/Description
People benefitted from improved sanitation facilities that have been constructed or rehabilitated under
the project, including: pit latrine with slab, ventilated improved pit (VIP) latrine, composting toilet, and
flush or pour-flush toilet/latrine to piped sewer system and septic tank, and fecal sludge treatment
plants.  It also includes shared sanitation facilities built in institutions and public places.
Frequency
Bi-annually.

Data Source
Primary sources include: MWE M&E system, NWSC Area performance reports, Refugee Database,
Refugees GIS Mapping for WASH and UPMiS.  Secondary sources include: MWE/DWD progress reports,
annual water and environments sector performance report and NWSC annual report.

Methodology for Data Collection

Responsibility for Data Collection
MWE / NWSC.

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

Monitoring & Evaluation Plan: Intermediate Results Indicators

Indicator Name
Piped household water connections (constructed or rehabilitated) resulting from the project
interventions
Definition/Description
Piped household water connection is defined as a connection that provides piped water to the consumer
through either a house or yard connection.  It does not include, inter alia, standpipes, protected well,
borehole, protected spring, piped water provided through tanker trucks, or vendors, unprotected wells,
unprotected spring, rivers, ponds and other surface water bodies, or bottled water.
Frequency
Bi-annually

Data Source
Primary sources include: MWE M&E system, NWSC Area performance reports, Refugee Database,
Refugees GIS Mapping for WASH   and UPMiS.  Secondary sources include: MWE/DWD progress reports,
annual water and environments sector performance report and NWSC annual report.

Methodology for Data Collection

Responsibility for Data Collection
MWE/DWD Rural and Urban/NWSC

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

Indicator Name
Improved community water points (constructed or rehabilitated) under the project
Definition/Description
Number of improved community water points constructed or rehabilitated under the project. A
community water point is defined as a public outlet for the provision of water supply to a number of
households. Improved community water points refer to standpipes, protected dug well, borehole, or
protected spring.  It does not include, inter alia, unprotected wells or unprotected springs..
Frequency
Bi-annually

Data Source
Primary sources include: MWE M&E system, NWSC tracking tools, Refugee Database and
UPMiS.  Secondary sources include: MWE/DWD progress reports, annual water and environments sector
performance report and NWSC annual report.

Methodology for Data Collection

Responsibility for Data Collection
MWE/NWSC

Indicator Name
Precent of water and sanitations committees with women in key position in project areas
Definition/Description
Women holding at least one key position in water user committees for influencing or making decisions
on WSS related matters. The key positions are: Chairperson, Vice Chairperson, Secretary and Treasurer.
Frequency
Bi-annually

Data Source
Primary sources include: MWE M&E system, NWSC tracking tools, Refugee Database and
UPMiS.  Secondary sources include: MWE/DWD progress reports, annual water and environments sector
performance report and NWSC annual report.

Methodology for Data Collection

Responsibility for Data Collection
MWE/DWD Rural, Urban, WRM /NWSC

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

Indicator Name
People within 200m (0.2km) of an improved water source benefitted in refugees hosting districts
Definition/Description
Percent of refugees and citizens in host communities that have an improved water source within 200m
of walking distance.
Frequency
Bi-annually

Data Source
Primary sources include:  MWE national M&E system, Refugee Database, Refugees GIS Mapping for
WASH, Water Supply Atlas, and UPMiS.  Secondary sources include: MWE/DWD/DWRM progress
reports, annual water & environments sector performance report, NWSC annual report.

Methodology for Data Collection

Responsibility for Data Collection
MWE/DWD Rural

Indicator Name
of which women
Definition/Description

Frequency
Bi-annually.

Data Source
Primary sources include:  MWE national M&E system, Refugee Database, Refugees GIS Mapping for
WASH, Water Supply Atlas, and UPMiS.  Secondary sources include: MWE/DWD/DWRM progress
reports, annual water & environments sector performance report, NWSC annual report.

Methodology for Data Collection

Responsibility for Data Collection
MWE/DWD Rural.

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

Indicator Name
New sewerage connections resulting from the project interventions
Definition/Description
Number of new sewer connections resulted from the project.
Frequency
Bi-annually

Data Source
Primary sources include:  MWE national M&E system and NWSC performance report and NWSC annual
report

Methodology for Data Collection

Responsibility for Data Collection
NWSC

Indicator Name
Number of service areas that reduce NRW to 20% under the project
Definition/Description
NRW is defined as the percentage of water produced that is not ultimately billed to consumers. Water
not billed to consumers results from water losses (physical and commercial losses) as well as authorized
consumption that are not billed.
Frequency
Bi-annually

Data Source
MWE / NWSC progress reports, annual water and environment sector performance reports, and water
supply and utility databases..

Methodology for Data Collection

Responsibility for Data Collection
MWE/NWSC

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

Indicator Name
Customer satisfaction Index for services supported under the project
Definition/Description
Percentage of surveyed customer/citizen that are satisfied with the services
Frequency
Annually

Data Source
MWE / NWSC progress reports, annual water and environment sector performance reports, and water
supply and utility databases..

Methodology for Data Collection

Responsibility for Data Collection
MWE / NWSC

Indicator Name
Selected service providers achieve > 80 percent in collection efficiency under the project
Definition/Description
Number of the service providers that achieve 80 percent or greater in collection efficiency.  Collection
efficiency is revenue collected over billed for the selected water service providers at the national and
local levels under the project.
Frequency
Bi-annually

Data Source
MWE / NWSC/ MWE progress reports, annual water and environment sector performance reports, and
water supply and utility databases.

Methodology for Data Collection

Responsibility for Data Collection
MWE / NWSC

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

Indicator Name
Volume of BOD pollution loads removed by treatment plants as result of project interventions (Tons per
year)
Definition/Description
This indicator measures the cumulative volume (mass) of Biological Oxygen Demand (BOD) pollution
loads removed by the treatment plant supported under the project. Project support may include
construction, expansion or rehabilitation of the treatment plant.
Frequency
Bi-annually

Data Source
NWSC performance report and NWSC annual report

Methodology for Data Collection

Responsibility for Data Collection
NWSC

Indicator Name
Catchment and source protection plans developed
Definition/Description
Plans developed to enhance catchment management and source protection measures (e.g., soil and
water conservation, river banks protection and restoration, etc.) in the selected water management
zones.
Frequency
Bi-annually

Data Source
MWE / DWRM progress reports, annual water and environment sector performance reports, and water
supply, utility and \refugee databases.

Methodology for Data Collection

Responsibility for Data Collection
MWE /DWDRM / DRD Rural

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

Indicator Name
National Water information systems established and operationalized under the project
Definition/Description
National water information systems established to track water data.  Operationalized is defined as the
systems are functional for data collection, monitoring and reporting.
Frequency
Bi-annually

Data Source
MWE/DWRM progress reports, annual Water & environment sector performance report and Water
Supply Atlas.

Methodology for Data Collection

Responsibility for Data Collection
MWE and DWRM

Indicator Name
State of water resources reports produced to inform decision making
Definition/Description
State of water resources management reports developed to inform decision making.
Frequency
Every two years

Data Source
MWE / DWRM Annual reports, annual water and environment sector performance reports.

Methodology for Data Collection

Responsibility for Data Collection
MWE /DWDRM

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

ANNEX 1: DETAILED PROJECT DESCRIPTION
1.
The Project will focus on three strategic areas: (a) strengthening WSS infrastructure and
catchment management measures in targeted areas; (b) supporting water-related institutions (NWSC,
MWE, local government, and service providers) in their efforts to establish and improve operational
efficiency and service quality in small towns and rural areas; and (c) strengthening national and regional
capacity to improve IWRM.
2.
The Project’s implementation approach will consider spatial differences between rural, small
towns, and urban large towns. It will also ensure that citizen engagement strategies, gender approaches,
and sanitation and hygiene campaigns are included to foster behavioral change and ownership among the
population. To ensure sustainability and increase resilience to climatic variability, the Project will integrate
WSS infrastructure investments with water source and catchment protection measures, comprehensive
sanitation planning, and service delivery support.
3.
Selection criteria. The selection of Project areas was based on consultations with key
stakeholders, the CPF, the MWE’s Sector Development Plan, and the NWSC’s Capital Improvement Plan,
as well as the potential to carry over subprojects from the WMDP. A summary of the selected service
areas and the corresponding selection criteria are included in Table 1.1.
Table 1.1. Summary of Selection Criteria Per Component
Components
Selected Service Areas
Selection Criteria
Component 1: WSS in Small Towns and RGCs and Support to Districts Hosting Refugees
WSS in Small Towns
•
Busia
•
Mbale Small Towns (Budaka,
Busolwe, Butaleja, Kadama,
and Tirinyi)
•
Namungalwe-Kaliro
•
Kyegegwa-Mpara-Ruyonza
•
Namasale

•
Subproject included in the WMDP (Busia and
Mable Small Towns)
•
Priority to the Northern and Eastern regions
given socioeconomic indicators; linked to the
NDP II equity strategy
•
Readiness - availability of master plans,
feasibility studies, and/or DED (Busia and
Mbale Small Towns)
•
Clear service delivery model
•
Reasonable per capita investment cost (less
than US$150 per capita) with the opportunity
to leverage economies of scale by including
other small towns (cluster approach)
Support to RGCs
•
Kasese RGC cluster:
Kyarumba, Kyondo, Lake
Katwe, and Kisinga
•
Bitsya -Kurungu
•
About 30 RGCs located in 20
districts - solar-powered
piped water schemes
•
District with high number of cholera cases and
low water coverage
•
Readiness - availability of master plan and
preliminary feasibility studies; adequate source
of water identified
•
Clear service delivery model identified
•
RGCs with access to safe water below 40
percent (Central and Western Regions) -
criteria for solar-powered piped water schemes

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

Components
Selected Service Areas
Selection Criteria
Support to Districts
Hosting Refugees
•
Yumbe, Arua, Adjumani,
Moyo, Lamwo, and
Kiryandongo
•
Districts hosting refugees located in the West
Nile and Northern Region; Kiryandongo in the
Mid-west selected due to large daily inflows of
refugees from South Sudan.
•
Subcounties of host districts with access to safe
water below 67 percent
•
Water stress - host districts require bulk water
transfer from other areas
•
Clear service delivery model identified
Component 2: WSS in Large Towns and Support to Districts Hosting Refugee
WSS in large towns
•
Mbale Municipality
•
Gulu Municipality and nearby
towns
•
Priority municipalities to support regional
economy in the Northern (Gulu) and Eastern
(Mbale) regions
•
Adequate service delivery model with the
NWSC; investments are part of the NWSC
capital improvement program
•
Readiness - detailed design approved for Mbale
and feasibility study for Gulu under way
Support to Districts
Hosting Refugees
•
Adjumani Town
•
Adequate service delivery model with the
NWSC; investments are part of the NWSC
capital improvement program
•
High operating cost; need to reduce cost to
improve sustainability.
Component 3: Water Resources Management
Catchment
management
measures
•
Four sub-catchments - Upper
Nile WMZ (Kochi and Aswa II
sub-catchments) and Kyoga
WMZ (Lwakhakha and Awoja
sub-catchments)
•
Sub-catchments linked with WSS infrastructure
investments under the IWMDP and the WMDP
•
CMPs developed and approved under the
WMDP and prioritized as hot spots
Water resources
strategy
•
Albert WMZ
•
Important zone because of oil exploration and
environmental degradation
CMPs
•
Nyamugasani and Kafu
catchments in Albert WMZ
and Sezibwa and Okweng in
Kyoga WMZ)
•
Sub-catchments identified as hot spots;
proposed rural water investments located in
several of these sub-catchments
WIS information
and groundwater
study
•
National
•
WIS design supported under the WMDP
•
Groundwater assessment and guidelines
needed to support selection of sites for
borehole drilling
4.
Service areas. Large towns (municipality), small towns, and RGCs are terms used to describe the
various service areas supported by the Project. For the Project, the following definitions are used:
•
Large towns. These comprise cities and municipalities defined as urban centers by the Uganda Bureau
of Statistics (UBOS) National Population and Housing Census (NPHC). Urban centers include all areas
appointed as city, municipality, or town council by the UBOS. The NWSC is responsible for managing

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

WSS service in large towns. The Project will benefit three large towns / municipalities: Gulu, Mbale,
and Adjumani.
•
Small towns. The MWE describes small towns as urban centers with a population of 5,000–15,000.
The Project will benefit small towns including Busia, Budaka, Busolwe, Butaleja, Kadama, Tirinyi,
Kyegegwa, Mpara, Ruyonza, Kaliro, Namungalwe and Namasale. The MWE is responsible for
developing small town WSS with management either delegated to local authorities, the NWSC or
UWAs.
•
RGCs. The RWSS sub-sector covers all rural communities with a population up to 5,000. The RWSS
sub-sector categorizes rural communities as either villages, which have a population up to 1,500, or
RGCs, which have a population between 1,500 and 5,000. Local authority management of rural water
systems is either through a community-based management system model or a small town model. The
Project will focus on RGCs that will be managed by the UWAs.

5.
Project components. The proposed IWMDP will comprise the following four components.
Component 1: Water Supply and Sanitation in Small Towns and Rural Growth Centers s and Support to
Districts Hosting Refugees (US$161.5 million, of which national IDA US$114.5 million, IDA 18 SubWindow for Refugees and Host Communities US$43.0 million, and counterpart funds US$4.0 million)
Subcomponent 1.1: Support to Small Towns and Rural Growth Centers

6.
This subcomponent will support activities to improve WSS in selected small towns and RGCs 41 in
the Recipient’s territory. Activities consist of (a) constructing and rehabilitating WSS facilities, as well as
providing associated services, including engineering, environmental and social studies, and supervision of
construction activities; (b) preparing and implementing sanitation plans in selected small towns; (c)
strengthening the capacity of selected UWAs42 in the areas of operational and financial management,
including the establishment of a remote monitoring system for rural water systems; and (d) carrying out
environmental and social management-related activities to protect water sources and sensitize
communities.

Subcomponent 1.2: Support to Districts Hosting Refugees

7.
This subcomponent will support activities to improve WSS in selected districts hosting refugees.
Activities consist of (a) constructing and rehabilitating WSS facilities, as well as providing associated
services, including engineering, environmental and social studies, and supervision of construction
activities; (b) preparing  and implementing  of sanitation plans; (c) strengthening the capacity of selected
UWAs in the areas of operational and financial management, including the establishment of a remote
monitoring system for rural water systems; (d) carrying out environmental and social managementrelated activities to (i) protect water sources and sensitize communities; and (ii) address the specific needs

41 Small towns mean any of the following areas of the Recipient’s territory: Busia, Namungalwe-Kaliro, Kyegegwa-MparaRuyonza, Namasale, and Butaleja- Busolwe and Budaka - Kadama-Tirinyi-Kibuku. RGCs means any of the following areas: Kasese
cluster (Kyarumba, Kyondo, Lake Katwe, and Kisinga); Bitsya -Kurungu; and 30 RGCs benefiting from solar-powered piped water
systems.
42 Selected UWA refer to five regional UWA (Northern, Midwestern, Southwestern, Central, and Eastern) appointed as the
water authorities in charge of specific water and sanitation service areas as gazetted by the MWE on July 14, 2017 (The Uganda
Gazette, Volume CX No. 39).

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

of host communities and refugees; and (e) strengthening the capacity of the MWE to develop and carry
out WSS sector policies and programs that promote more sustainable and efficient service delivery at
refugee settlements.

8.
This subcomponent will take a long-term and systematic approach to WSS service delivery at the
district level while addressing some immediate needs at the community level. This approach is aligned
with the GoU and UNHCR’s approach to shift from a humanitarian aid response to a development one.
The subcomponent will include complementary water source management and catchment protection
measures to support districts hosting refugees build their resilience and capacity to respond to waterrelated shocks. Depending on their location, refugee settlements will be served either through individual
water systems or by water extension networks from the town/RGC systems. This will greatly reduce water
trucking to the settlements and will provide cheaper and more reliable safe water to refugees. In addition,
the investments will improve overall infrastructure and water supply needs in the host communities.

Beneficiaries
9.
The combined population expected to benefit from Component 1 is approximately 856,000
people. The population will benefit from improved and increased coverage of WSS services, which in turn
will increase the availability of safe drinking water, reduce the distance to safe WSS systems and water
collection time, and improve sanitary conditions at the household and community levels. Furthermore,
service providers (the UWAs and the NWSC) that receive support under the Project and their staff will
benefit from TA and investments focused on improving their performance. Table 1.2 lists the small towns,
RGCs, and service providers under Component 1.
Table 1.2. Small Towns, RGCs, and Service Providers under Component 1
Subcomponent
Region
Service Area
Population
Service Provider
Small urban towns
Eastern
Busia
103,390
NWSC

Eastern
Namungalwe-Kaliro
55,900
NWSC

Eastern
Mbale Small Towns

NWSC

Western
Kyegegwa-Mpara-Ruyonza
43,000
Midwestern UWA

FSTF small towns
103,863

Northern
Namasale
43,000
Northern UWA
RGCs
Western
Kasese cluster (Kyarumba, Kyondo,
Lake Katwe, and Kisinga)
36,204
Midwestern UWA

Western
Bitsya -Kurungu

Southwestern
UWA

Central/Mid -
Western and
Mid-Eastern
subregions
32 RGCs located in 20 districts -
solar-powered piped water schemes
77,236
Midwestern UWA
Central UWA
Eastern UWA
Districts Hosting
Refugees
Northern
Yumbe, Arua, Adjumani, Moyo, and
Lamwo

Kiryandongo
393,142
Northern UWA

Midwestern UWA

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

Proposed Activities
10.
Water supply investments. Investments include piped water supply schemes either fed by surface
water (river/lakes) or high-yield boreholes.
11.
For surface water systems, activities include (a) construction of new surface water intake
structures; (b) construction of new Water Treatment Plants (WTPs); and (c) construction and
rehabilitation of transmission and distribution systems. The transmission and distribution systems will
include water mains, reservoirs, and distribution networks; water connections; macro and micro
metering; and pressure monitoring systems. The preference is to maximize gravity flow within the systems
to reduce energy costs.
12.
For high-yield boreholes, the MWE is introducing solar-powered water supply schemes to
eliminate long queues and supply more people at each source. The scheme comprises a borehole
equipped with a solar-powered submersible pump; storage; and a distribution pipe network (including
public stands, household connections, and meters). The capital cost is high but is balanced by the benefits
of reduced O&M costs over the life span of the systems. The water supply systems planned under this
Project include borehole yields of greater than 5 m3/h and aim to serve populations between 1,500 and
5,000 in RGCs.43 The approach targets areas that have limited surface water resources but have good
groundwater potential as per groundwater assessments and have limited access to the electricity grid.
The targeted RGCs have water access levels below 40 percent compared to the national average of 67
percent coverage in the rural areas.
13.
Sanitation. The Project will finance institutional sanitation facilities at markets, health posts, and
schools in the Project areas. The benefiting schools are selected based on pupil-stance ratios over 70, as
well as committed school management and administrative teams.44 Other benefiting public places will be
determined by the condition of the structure, availability of land, number of intended users, and the local
government’s development plan for the specific area. The component will support the establishment of
proper fecal sludge management systems in small towns that include collection, treatment, reuse and
disposal, including the construction of FSTFs. The first phase of sanitation-focused investment will include
the construction of FSTFs in the small towns of Busia, Koboko, Moyo and Ngora as well as Rukungiri
Municipality based on high demand, improved fecal sludge management, and clustering opportunities
with other towns. TA will be provided to targeted small towns to develop sanitation plans. Finally, the
Project will support sanitation and hygiene promotion activities, including the application of CLTS for
mobilizing communities to eliminate open defecation and for sanitation marketing to change behaviors
and to scale up effective and sustainable demand and supply for improved sanitation and hygiene by using
social and commercial marketing practices. Sanitation and hygiene promotion activities applied to the
Project will follow specific steps and guidelines included in the MWE’s Hygiene Education and Sanitation
Promotion Template.
14.
Support to service providers. The component will support an overall utility assessment and
business plan for each of the participating UWAs. The plans will focus on NRW, commercial operations,

43 The MWE supports three categories: Mini (yield 1–3 m3/h), Medium (yield 3–5 m3/h), and Large (>5 m3/h) solar-powered
water systems.
44 A pupil-stance ratio of 40 is considered a national average.

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

and asset management. The Project will finance specific activities derived from the business plans that
are aimed at achieving financial viability. The Project proposes to deliver this support to the UWAs through
professionalization contracts under which a private firm would be contracted to help the UWAs
implement and assimilate standard operating procedures and systems (for network, commercial,
administrative, and FM). The Project will also support data collection and reporting, including remote
monitoring systems for solar-powered piped water schemes, which will allow centralized monitoring of
the functionality and operational efficiency of the systems, as well as overall utility performance
monitoring under the UPMIS. Given that the NWSC has a good track record and solid utility management
practices, the Project will focus on operationalizing the MWE’s guidelines for transferring small towns to
the NWSC. The Project will support the application of community mobilization activities to ensure that
the communities and local authorities are informed on the new service delivery model.
15.
Environmental and social management. The Project will finance activities included in the
safeguards instruments (ESMPs and RAPs). Although also included in the safeguards documents, it is
important to highlight the following themes: water source protection, community mobilization and
sensitization, and cross-cutting activities, such as mainstreaming gender and HIV prevention activities.
16.
Catchment/water source protection activities will be carried out in all water supply systems
financed by the Project to ensure that the quantity and quality of water provided by the respective water
sources does not deteriorate in the future. Activities will be derived from catchment/water source
protections plans that have been prepared under the WMDP or will be prepared as part of the ESIAs under
the IWMDP. The plans include the following objectives: (a) to secure the land in the immediate catchment
areas of the water sources; (b) to implement appropriate catchment management measures to ensure
the integrity and security of the water sources; and (c) to support the communities in the nearby
catchment areas to carry out environmentally friendly livelihood activities, such as practicing modern land
use management and agroforestry farming practices.
17.
The main activities will include the following:
•
Planning: Catchment assessments will delineate the catchments and establish baseline
conditions. Site-specific water source and catchment protection plans will be developed and
implemented for every water supply system in accordance with the MWE’s Framework and
Guidelines for Water Source Protection (2012).
•
Water source protection activities will be undertaken by the contractors for each water
supply system. Activities include fencing/marking of buffer zones, planting appropriate grass
and tree species, and creating diversion channels for storm water management.
•
Education and sensitization activities to promote friendly livelihood activities, including
training women and youth groups on tree nursery development.
•
Conducting regular environmental monitoring and inspection to ensure compliance.
18.
Community mobilization and sensitization. All Project investments will be accompanied by a
community participatory approach throughout the Project cycle—identification/preparation, execution,
and operation—to foster behavior change and sustainability. These activities will be guided by the MWE’s

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

Software Steps (Steps in Implementation of Water and Sanitation Software Activities, 2012). The steps
provide guidance on awareness creation, capacity building, service provision, and follow-up. There are 19
steps, which are grouped into four phases: (a) the general planning and advocacy phase; (b) the preconstruction, mobilization, and training phase; (c) the construction phase; and (d) the post-construction
phase. The Software Steps will be included in the ESMPs and the Project Implementation Manual.
19.
Cross-cutting activities. The Project will enhance the capacity for gender mainstreaming in the
WSS sector by supporting the implementation of guidelines for the integration of gender in water
programs and activities, as well as improving the M&E system to be more gender responsive in line with
the MWE’s Water and Sanitation Gender Mainstreaming Strategy. Furthermore, the Project will support
mainstreaming of HIV/AIDS prevention in the sector at the local government levels. The Project will be
guided by the Water Sector HIV/AIDS Strategy. HIV/AIDS prevention can be mainstreamed through
incorporating HIV/AIDS prevention and safe sex messages into community sensitization and training
activities. Likewise, contractors should be informed about HIV/AIDS prevention to influence their behavior
in the communities where they operate. HIV/AIDS-related activities will be budgeted for and included in
the ESMP.
Implementation
20.
Component 1 will be implemented by the MWE’s UWSSD and RWSSD and its regional offices in
coordination with the NWSC and local authorities. The refugee host community subcomponent will be
implemented by the MWE in close consultation with other key stakeholders, such as the OPM, the UNHCR,
and local authorities. DED and biddings documents have been completed for the Busia WSS subproject.
With the support of the WMDP and counterpart funds, the MWE has engaged (or is in the process of
engaging) consultancies to develop feasibility studies, detailed designs, and safeguards documents for
most of the proposed activities under this component. For some sanitation and water supply investments,
studies will be financed during the first phase of Project implementation. The Project will also support
construction supervision to oversee and provide quality control of the detailed designs and overall
construction, including compliance with environmental and social safeguards.
Component 2: WSS Water Supply and Sanitation in Large Towns and Support to Districts Hosting
Refugees (US$120.5 million of which national IDA US$77.5 million, IDA 18 Sub-Window for Refugees
and Host Communities US$15.0 million, counterpart funds US$3.0 million, and KfW US$25.0 million)

Subcomponent 2.1: Water Supply and Sanitation in Large Towns
21.
This component will directly support the GoU’s growth strategy to revitalize Uganda’s Eastern and
Northern regions. This component will finance activities designed to improve WSS services in the
municipalities of Mbale (Eastern region) and Gulu (Northern region) as well as nearby small towns.
Activities consist of (a) constructing and rehabilitating WSS infrastructure in the municipality of Mbale; (b)
constructing water supply system for the municipality of Gulu; (c) undertaking construction supervision
activities and engineering and environmental studies, including the Augmented Water Supply Study; (d)
strengthening the capacity of the NWSC in the areas of operational and financial management to support
improved performance in the project-supported areas; and (e) carrying out environmental and social
management-related activities with a view to protecting water sources and sensitizing communities. The
component will also support mitigation measures to ensure adequate implementation and O&M of the

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

infrastructure investments. The investments will improve Gulu and Mbale’s resilience to floods and
droughts.
22.
Mbale municipality WSS subproject. This subproject will finance (a) catchment management
measures for protecting the current water sources at Nabijo and Nabuyonga rivers and at the new
Namatala intake; (b) construction of a new intake and water mains at Namatala; (c) rehabilitation and
expansion of the WTPs at Bungokho and Manafwa; (d) rehabilitation and expansion of water mains and
distribution networks, including storage capacity, metering, and water connections; and (e) rehabilitation
and expansion of the Mbale town sewerage system. The Mbale bulk water system will supply water to
the Mbale small towns included under Component 1: Butaleja-Busolwe and Budaka-Kadama-TirinyiKibuku. This subproject will also include community mobilization and sensitization and cross-cutting
activities as described in Component 1 as well as consultancy services for construction supervision and
engineering support.
23.
Gulu water supply subproject. The Gulu water supply subproject is part of the Integrated Program
to Improve the Living Conditions (IPILC) in Gulu, which aims to invest in basic infrastructure to support the
GoU’s national objective of revitalizing Gulu’s economy. A feasibility study conducted under the IPILC
recommended a new water supply system using the Nile River to ensure water production capacity to
meet 2040 water demands. The Gulu water supply subproject includes the construction of a new intake
structure at the Nile River, a WTP, a pump station, a 70 km transmission pipeline from Karuma to Gulu
and distribution systems, including reservoirs, metering, and public standpipes and household
connections. The Project will also include installation of branch-off systems to connect six small towns to
the Gulu water supply subproject, as well as improvements to the small-town distribution network. The
cost estimate for the Gulu water supply subproject is budgeted at US$55 million, and it will include
financing from the KfW Development Bank. The World Bank will finance the Karuma-Gulu transmission
pipeline, improvements to the Gulu distribution networks, source protection activities and improvements
to the small-town water supply networks for an estimated amount of US$28.75 million. The KfW will
finance the water intake and WTP for an estimated amount of US$25 million. The GoU will contribute an
estimated amount of US$1.4 million to cover RAP-related compensations. Both the KfW and the World
Bank will follow Uganda and World Bank safeguards guidelines. Sanitation investments are not included
under the Project as they are already covered and financed under the overall IPILC.

Subcomponent 2.2: Support to Districts Hosting Refugees

24.
This subcomponent will support activities to improve WSS in Adjumani Town.45 The activities
consist of: (a) constructing and rehabilitating WSS facilities, as well as providing associated services,
including engineering, environmental and social studies and supervision of construction activities; (b)
preparing and implementing of sanitation plans; and (c) carrying out environmental and social
management related activities to protect water sources and sensitize communities.
Implementation
The NWSC through its P&CDD is responsible for managing the WSS system in Mbale Municipality, Gulu
Municipality, and Adjumani Town; therefore, this component will be implemented by the NWSC in close

45 Adjumani District” means the towns of Adjumani, Pakele, Ciforo and Dzaipi, as well as the parishes of Agojo and Mungula.

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

coordination with the MWE and local authorities. The Mbale small towns are currently managed by local
authorities, but once proposed works are completed, the towns will be transferred to the NWSC in
accordance with the MWE’s guidelines. DED, RAP, ESIA/ESMP for Mbale were completed under the
current WMDP. The NWSC has engaged a consulting firm to carry out the detailed designs for Gulu, which
are expected to be completed by December 2018.
Component 3: Water Resources Management (US$25.5 million of which National IDA US$25.0 million
and counterpart funds US$0.5 million)
Context
25.
Uganda’s economy is highly dependent on water resources, yet there is limited cross-sector
coordination when planning water-related interventions. Concerns over inadequate water resource
management have grown given Uganda’s recent industrialization, the frequency of floods and droughts,
visible environmental degradation, and the pollution of water resources. This situation calls for
mechanisms to promote integrated development and management of water resources to create synergies
among various sectors, reduce water and environmental degradation, and ensure more efficient
utilization of water resources to meet various social and economic demands. To address these challenges,
the MWE developed a ‘Framework for Catchment Based Integrated Water Resources Management’ in
2010 as a basis for integrated development and management of water and related resources. This
framework guides the establishment of CMOs and the preparation of CMPs. The framework is being
promoted through the four WMZs: Albert WMZ, Kyoga WMZ, Victoria WMZ, and Upper Nile WMZ. In line
with this framework, catchments have been demarcated and are the units through which water and
related resources will be managed and developed. CMPs are being prepared through a participatory
process following the recently published ‘Uganda Catchment Management Planning Guidelines’. The
World Bank, through the WMDP, has provided key support to the development of the IWRM framework
in Uganda, which is embedded in the National Water Policy. Under this Project, the GoU proposed
operationalizing the IWRM framework through the implementation of catchment management measures
and the consolidation of IWRM planning instruments, including a water resources monitoring and
information system.
26.
This component will finance Project activities designed to support implementation of catchment
management measures in select sub-catchments as well as national efforts to mainstream IWRM in
Uganda’s water sector program. Specific activities include (a) undertaking catchment management
measures to promote soil and water conservation, river bank protection and restoration; and (b) and
providing alternative livelihoods for affected communities. The proposed component will include a TA to
prepare a Water Resources Strategy for the Albert WMZ, CMPs and related technical studies for priority
sub-catchments in identified hot spot sub catchments, and a national groundwater management study;
and (c) activities to strengthen water resource monitoring and information systems, including installation
of the WIS at the national and WMZ levels, installation of hydrologic monitoring systems, and
rehabilitation of the National Water Quality Reference Laboratory.
27.
Apart from the national support to IWRM, this component will mainly support activities in the
Upper Nile and Kyoga WMZs (where most of the WSS investments financed under this Project and the
WMDP are located). This component will contribute to national, regional, and local stakeholders’ capacity
to apply an IWRM approach to infrastructure development.

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

Catchment Management Measures
28.
This component will include catchment management measures in four degraded sub-catchments
in the Upper Nile WMZ (Kochi and Aswa II sub-catchments) and Kyoga WMZ (Lwakhakha and Awoja subcatchments). The interventions will be based on CMPs that were prepared under the WMDP with the full
participation of catchment stakeholders. The four sub-catchments were identified as hot spots because
high population pressure, poor land use management practices, and wetland encroachment are leading
to excessive land degradation and water quality and quantity challenges. Table 1.3 presents the proposed
interventions for the four sub-catchments. The interventions are classified as: (a) soil and water
conservation measures; (b) river bank protection and restoration; and (c) alternative livelihoods for
affected communities. These interventions are complementary to the water source protection measures
included in Component 1, which mainly focus on micro-catchments surrounding the intake water source
structures for the respective WSS systems.
Table 1.3. Indicative Catchment Management Measures
WMZ
Catchment
Subcatchment
Hot Spot Issue
Proposed Measures
Kyoga
Mpologoma
Lwakhakha
• Soil erosion
• Deforestation
• River bank
erosion and
siltation
• Biodiversity loss
• Soil and water conservation measures
(rehabilitation of gullies, planting grass strip
contours and afforestation)
• River bank protection and restoration
(demarcation and revegetation of the river
banks using live markers, construction of
gabions)
• Alternative livelihood promotion (bee
keeping, increasing fodder production along
river banks)
Kyoga
Awoja
Middle and
Lower Awoja
• Deforestation
and poor
agronomic
practices
• Floods
• Droughts
• Soil and water conservation measures
(construction of stone and soil bunds,
infiltration pits, check dams, receiver ponds,
and rehabilitation of gullies)
• Environmental management measures (tree
planting in degraded areas, conservation and
demarcation of wetland systems, and river
bank protection and stabilization)
• Livelihood improvement measures
(improving livestock production through
increasing fodder production, improving
horticultural production, and promoting
energy saving technologies)
Upper
Nile
Aswa
ASWA II
• Soil erosion
• River bank
degradation and
high sediment
load in rivers
• Wetland
degradation
• Flooding
• Soil and water conservation measures
(construction of infiltration trenches and
contour buffer strips, planting of contour
grass strips, stone and soil bunds)
• Environmental management measures
(demarcation and revegetation of the river
banks, construction of gabions for river bank
stabilization)

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

WMZ
Catchment
Subcatchment
Hot Spot Issue
Proposed Measures
• Declining
biodiversity
• Livelihood improvement (improving livestock
production, improving horticultural
production, promoting energy saving
technologies)
Upper
Nile
Albert Nile
Kochi
• Floods and
droughts
• Wetlands and
forests
degradation
• Poor land
practices and
high sediment
loads in rivers
• Inadequate
surface water
resources
• Soil and water conservation measures
(construction of infiltration trenches,
percolation pits and contour buffer strips,
gully plugs, and planting of grass strips along
contours)
• Environmental management measures
(demarcation and revegetation of the river
banks using live markers, construction of
gabions for river bank stabilization)
• Livelihood improvement (improving livestock
production, improving horticultural
production, promoting energy saving
technologies)
Water Resources Strategy for the Albert WMZ
29.
Uganda is divided into four WMZs—the Upper Nile, Kyoga, Albert, and Victoria. The current
WMDP has focused mainly on two zones—the Upper Nile and Kyoga WMZs, while the LVEMP II has
focused on the Victoria WMZ. The proposed Project will provide support for the Albert WMZ, which lies
in the western part of Uganda and is characterized by high topography as well as a high potential for
hydropower generation and water supply through GFS. Challenges that water supply schemes in the WMZ
face include significant seasonal fluctuations in water quantity, poor water quality and landslides, which
occasionally wash away systems. The water demand in the WMZ is expected to grow given the expected
increase in oil production investments by 2020. Several rural water schemes (including the two gravity
flow systems) that will be supported by the Project are in this zone. The Water Resources Strategy will be
prepared with full participation of all stakeholders under the CMO and will follow Uganda’s CMP
Guidelines.
Catchment Management Plans
30.
In addition, the Project will support preparation of management plans for four other hot spot
catchments in the Albert and Kyoga WMZs. These CMPs will be prepared with the full participation of all
stakeholders under the CMO, will follow Uganda Catchment Management Planning Guidelines, and will
incorporate lessons learned from the WMDP. This activity will also strengthen capacity at the regional and
local levels to utilize analytical tools to prepare integrated and strategic catchment action plans in a
participatory manner.
Groundwater Assessment
31.
Groundwater is widely distributed in Uganda and is usually potable. Capital investments and
operational costs of groundwater-based systems are much lower than those of surface water-based

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

systems. Groundwater development is also being considered for small-scale irrigation and other uses as
an adaptation measure to climate change and in situations where surface water sources are not available
at a reasonable cost. Despite Uganda’s growing dependency on groundwater, concerns remain over its
sustainability. The problems associated with excessive groundwater development are very localized.
Effective planning and management strategies to regulate and control groundwater activities are key to
ensuring that the groundwater is utilized sustainably to address unmet water demands. The availability
of groundwater and its vulnerability to human and climatic impacts needs to be further assessed given
that many towns and RGCS are using groundwater for solar-powered water schemes.
32.
This component will support a comprehensive groundwater assessment and the development of
a toolkit to inform further development of groundwater. The toolkit will include guidelines on aquifer
utilization as well as reports and maps showing the aquifers’ characteristics, distribution, and responses
to pumping. This work will be closely coordinated with the implementation of Component 1 to ensure
that the WSS investments are adequately guided on the potential for and sustainability of groundwater
development, the spacing of production boreholes as well as the pumping regimes. The information
generated will be fed into the WIS for use in future groundwater development projects.
Water Information System
33.
A robust and reliable water resources monitoring network is key to the operationalization of the
IWRM framework and to building Uganda’s resilience to climatic variation. A review of the water
monitoring network carried out by the DWRM in 2005 showed that there is insufficient baseline data on
groundwater as well as monitoring of boreholes to represent the full range of hydrogeological and climatic
conditions in Uganda. For surface water, the review revealed that the operational gauges are inadequate
and that the digitized data are not transmitted to a central processing center due to lack of a data
transmission interface with an automated sensor. To address these issues, the WMDP supported the
strengthening and expansion of the existing hydrological, hydrometeorological, water quality monitoring
network in the Kyoga and Upper Nile WMZs as well as the design of a comprehensive WIS that integrates
the hydrological information system, spatial data system, information management system, knowledge
management system, and data management system. The WMDP supported the development of the
detailed design of the National WIS, which will now be implemented at the national and regional level in
all WMZs through this project.
34.
In addition, the Project will further improve water resources monitoring by providing additional
monitoring stations and equipment to monitor surface water, groundwater, water quality, and climate
variations. The Project will also support the use of online remote sensing equipment to enable real-time
monitoring and improve the quality and timeliness of data collection for the WIS. The Project will also
support the rehabilitation of the National Water Quality Reference Laboratory.
Component 4: Project Implementation and Institutional Strengthening (US$5.5 million of which
national IDA US$5.0 million and counterpart funds US$0.5 million)
This component will finance activities designed to ensure effective and efficient Project implementation
and coordination as well as institutional strengthening to support WSS service delivery reforms. Project
management activities will include (a) coordination of planning, monitoring, reporting and supervision of
the Project; (b) training of MWE and NWSC staff on World Bank procedures related to procurement,

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

environmental and social safeguards, and FM; and (c) establishing a PST comprising key technical
specialists (for example, water resource management specialist, safeguards, M&E, and fiduciary
specialists) to assist the Project IAs. Institutional strengthening activities will include (a) preparing a water
supply and sanitation sector financing study to support the implementation of Uganda’s 2018–2023 Water
and Environment SSIP; and (b) strengthening the MWE’s regulatory functions of the at the regional level.
35.
This component will ensure that the IAs have adequate inputs for Project oversight, reporting,
and implementation. Project Management Activities
36.
Component 4 supports the implementation of Components 1 to 3. This component aims at
ensuring effective and efficient overall project management by the MWE, as well as supporting the two
IAs (NWSC and MWE) to effectively implement and manage the Project. This will include Project planning,
implementation, monitoring and reporting, and management in line with the GoU and World Bank
procedures as well as the procurement of equipment required for implementation, such as office
equipment (for example, computers) and vehicles (including O&M for the vehicles).
Institutional Strengthening to Support WSS Sector Reform
37.
Sector financing. The MWE is currently developing an SSIP for 2018–2023. Recent developments
and trends and the foreseeable donor commitments indicate that it is unlikely that Uganda will have
adequate WSS funding to achieve the national sector targets and SDGs. The new SSIP will make this
funding gap visible, but more support is needed to address this challenge. Therefore, this component will
support a sector financing study to support the MWE leadership make strategic decisions given limited
resources and explore new financing opportunities from internal and external sources (including publicprivate partnership [PPP], commercial financing, and green infrastructure investments).
38.
Strengthening WSS regulatory functions. This component will finance TA and capacity building
to strengthen the regulatory functions of the MWE. A recent comprehensive assessment and ongoing
projects financed by other DPs have been considered in the design of this component to increase synergies
in the consolidation of the water sector. The Project will finance training for national and regional
regulatory unit staff and service providers on the sector performance monitoring framework, the O&M
institutional framework, and other relevant regulatory areas. The planned improvements to UPMIS
system (under Component 1) will facilitate the monitoring of performance and compliance of umbrellas
with improved information/data quality and reporting by the umbrellas.
Umbrella Water Authority Model
Background
39.
In 2002, the GoU launched the UO to provide O&M support to water authorities in small towns
and rural areas. To date, the UWAs have played a key role in keeping the systems functional by providing
high-level technical and managerial support. In addition, the UWAs have provided financial support for
major repairs, training, and water quality monitoring. The GoU and donors subsidize the UWAs’ services.
40.
Despite the effectiveness of the Umbrella support model, the small towns and RGCs have
struggled to provide sustainable day-to-day O&M, employ preventative maintenance, and properly

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

manage their assets. Very few providers have been able to save enough for capital maintenance
investments in their systems. Overall, the small towns and growth centers remain highly dependent on
donor-funded backup structures (UWAs and technical support units) for support.
41.
To remedy this issue, the NWSC assumed responsibility for 204 small- to medium-size schemes
(see the ‘Sectoral and Institutional Context’ section of the main text for more detail on the transfer
process). The NWSC, however, does not have capacity to assume management of all of Uganda’s 1,000
plus small- to medium-size schemes. Given this reality, the GoU began, with the support of DPs and the
participation of stakeholders, analyzing alternative solutions. After much study, the GoU ultimately
decided on the umbrella approach, which was derived from the 2016 ‘Reorganization of Water Supply
and Sewerage Service Areas in the Urban Water and Sanitation Sub-sector in Uganda, Phase II – Preferred
Option Report’ by the German Agency for International Cooperation (Deutsche Gesellschaft für
Internationale Zusammenarbeit, GIZ)
The Umbrella Approach
42.
Under the umbrella approach, the six regional UWAs will assume direct management
responsibilities (contract management, asset management, and revenue collection) for small towns and
RGCs that are not managed by the NWSC. Each UWA will manage approximately 30 schemes with
approximately 300 households per scheme. The UWAs will also continue in their high-level advisory role,
providing support to approximately 400 schemes.
43.
At the local level, the former Water Boards will become Water and Sanitation Committees. The
Water and Sanitation Committees will represent consumer interests, and the local scheme operators
(individual or firm private operators) will report to the UWA. Figure 1.1 illustrates the roles and
responsibilities of the various actors under the umbrella approach. The MWE has determined specific role
and responsibilities for key actors (the UWAs, committees, local governments’, scheme operator, and the
MWE) under the UWA model.

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

Figure 1.1. Umbrella Water Authority Model

Source: MWE.
44.
As stated in the MWE’s Water and Environment Sector Performance Report 2017, “It will be a
main focus of work for 2017/2018 to establish their [the UWAs’] new governance, FM and monitoring
systems and conduct related capacity building.”
45.
For the time being, the UWAs will maintain their current governance structure. In addition, the
UWAs will, following the GoU’s long-held policy, set tariffs that cover full O&M cost recovery, including
overhead costs and a portion of investment costs. The UWAs may decide to apply tariffs that vary
according to the type of water systems, or a UWA may take a ‘cross subsidy approach’ and apply a uniform
tariff for all its water systems. The guidelines that the MWE is preparing on the operation of the UWAs
will further define tariff structures.
Performance To-Date
46.
In August 2017, the MWE appointed six regional UWAs (Northern, Midwestern, Karamoja,
Southwestern, Central, and Eastern) as water and sanitation authorities for 71 small towns (about 10 small
towns per UWA). To date, the UWAs have performed relatively well with collection rates at 75 percent,

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

NRW at 29 percent, and metering rates at 80 percent for the initial 71 gazetted schemes. Table 1.4
provides financial information on two UWAs.
Table 1.4. Performance of the Northern and Midwestern Umbrella
Location of headquarter
Northern
Mid-Western
Umbrella organization established
Start of operations as water authority
August 2017
August 2007
Number of districts where Umbrella operates
Number of gazetted schemes (direct management responsibility of
the Umbrella)
Number of additional schemes supported by the Umbrella
Total number of active connections (gazetted schemes only)
2,809
2,387
Total revenue collected (October 2017, gazetted towns only)
UGX 27.5 million
UGX 33.6 million
Total direct O&M costs (operator remuneration, energy, chemicals,
routine maintenance)
(October 2017, gazetted towns only)
UGX 16.3 million
UGX 27.1 million
47.
While the UWAs can cover their routine O&M costs,46 they do not generate enough revenue to
cover their capital investments. Capital investments, however, are critical for the successful operation of
the UWAs given that many schemes are not fully operational and require urgent rehabilitation work. In
addition, many schemes do not have meters, have limited private connections, and lack water source
protection. To overcome this financing gap, the GoU has been piloting a Revolving Financing Facility with
the UWAs as well as securing external financing from donors.
48.
The Project’s financial evaluation indicates that after investments in the systems are made, the
operating costs per cubic meter will decrease gradually as production increases, building the capacity of
the UOs to maintain the works and assume future capital investment costs. However, to ensure the
sustainability of the systems and the service, the UO guidelines should include the following: (a) full
operating expenditure cost recovery with additional margin of at least 25 percent; (b) automatic tariff
adjustment to variation of costs; (c) efficiency gains in operations and revenue collection; and (d) water
scheme management contracts with mechanisms to ensure compliance. See Annex 4 for more detail.

46 Only a few diesel-powered schemes are expected to pose cost recovery challenges. In these towns, cost optimization
strategies including the installation of solar-powered systems will be considered as part of the utility management support.

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

ANNEX 2: IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS

Project Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
1.
The MWE and the NWSC are the IAs for the IWMDP and the Project implementation
arrangements will utilize existing GoU systems and structures. The Permanent Secretary of the MWE will
be the Accounting Officer for Project funds mapped to Components 1, 3, and 4, while the Managing
Director of the NWSC will be the Accounting Officer for Project funds mapped to Component 2. On a dayto-day basis, the relevant directorates and departments will be responsible for operational activities
including coordination, FM, monitoring, and supervision of their respective component activities. The
MWE’s Directorate of Water Development (DWD) through its UWSSD will be responsible for small towns
under Subcomponent 1.1, the DWD’s RWSSD for RGCs under Subcomponent 1.1 and Subcomponent 1.2,
the NWSC through its P&CDD for Component 2, the MWE’s DWRM for Component 3, and the MWE’s
WESLD for Component 4 including overall Project coordination. The detailed Project component
implementation arrangements are outlined below. Each component or subcomponent will have a focal
point–an officer in charge of overseeing the implementation of activities mapped to the respective
department or directorate. The existing decentralized management structures (WMZs, NWSC town
offices, UOs, and WSDFs) and local governments will support the IAs in their efforts to deliver outputs in
each of the Project areas.
2.
Coordination mechanism. Given the number of departments (MWE’s UWSSD, RWSSD, DWRM,
and WESLD, and NWSC’ P&CDD) involved in the Project, the MWE’s WESLD will take the responsibility for
overall coordination and communication. The WESLD will liaise with the different implementation teams
to coordinate planning, reporting, supervision, and oversight across departments involved in the Project.
The WESLD will engage a PST consisting of water resource management specialist, procurement, FM,
M&E, and safeguards specialists to assist focal points in both IAs. This team will provide support to the
WESLD assisting all Project implementation departments and units to carry out specialized tasks, as well
as consolidating work plans, planning budgets, monitoring results, compiling reports, and disseminating
outputs and outcomes. Procurement and accounting functions in the NWSC will be undertaken through
the respective departments—the PDU and Accounts Section—in line with fiduciary and procurement
requirements. The WESWG will provide the overall operational and policy guidance to ensure that the
Project components and activities are implemented as intended to fulfill the Project objectives. The
WESWG membership comprises MWE leadership, other line ministries, and all DPs supporting the water
and environment sector. For the implementation of the host community and refugee subcomponent, the
MWE will liaise with the OPM and the UNHCR to ensure a coordinated response to refugee inflow,
resettlement, and protection issues.
3.
The WESWG and relevant governing bodies (NWSC Board of Directors) will provide high-level
operational and policy guidance to ensure that the Project components and activities are implemented as
intended. WESWG members include leaders from the MWE, the NWSC, other line ministries, and all DPs
who are active in the water and environment sector. The WESWG will facilitate coordination of Project
activities with other DPs who are supporting complementary activities.

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

Specific Component Implementation and Administration Mechanisms
Component 1: Water Supply and Sanitation in Small Towns and Rural Growth Centers and Support to
Districts Hosting Refugees
4.
The MWE has assigned a Project implementation role to the DWD for Component 1 through the
UWSSD and RWSSD. The DWD has assigned adequate staff to implement, manage, and monitor these
tasks and ensure that the incremental costs associated with Project implementation are fully funded
throughout the Project’s duration. The DWD will work closely with the regional structures (WSDFs and
others) who will support day-to-day implementation and liaise with local governments and regional
utilities in which the subprojects are located. The DWD will liaise with the WESLD (Component 4) to
coordinate planning, monitoring, reporting, and information management across the Project.
Component 2: Water Supply and Sanitation in Large Towns and Support to Districts Hosting Refugee
5.
This component will be implemented by the NWSC through its P&CDD, drawing on staff from
other divisions and the Project areas as required. At Project completion, or significant completion of
major, operable phases, the P&CDD will hand the system over to the local town NWSC management. The
NWSC has appointed a component Project manager who will be responsible for the activities in all three
Project towns. The Project manager will report to the director of the P&CDD who, in turn, reports to the
Managing Director. The NWSC has also appointed a principal engineer responsible for each town to
supervise the technical implementation of activities in the respective towns. Each principal engineer will
be assisted by a senior engineer as well as safeguard (social and environmental) specialists, one for each
Project town. Procurement and accounting functions in the NWSC will be undertaken through the
respective departments—the PDU and Accounts Section—in line with fiduciary and procurement
requirements.
Component 3: Water Resources Management
6.
This component will be implemented by the DWRM. A focal point, who will report to the Director
of DWRM, has been appointed for overseeing implementation of the entire component. The focal point
will be responsible for coordinating the component’s activities, including liaising with the WMZs and
consolidating required reports and annual plans. A number of subcomponent focal points have also been
appointed to provide oversight for their respective subcomponents. In addition to coordinating activities
under their respective subcomponents, these focal points will monitor work progress, implementation of
the PP, and achievement of subcomponent milestones and results. In addition, the focal points will
prepare annual work plans in consultation with the activity teams. At the local government level, the
CMOs will be established in the respective Project areas. These CMOs are designed to provide a
sustainable and effective role for catchment stakeholders in water development and management in the
catchment. The WMZs are responsible for establishing, informing, and collaborating with the CMOs.
Component 4: Project Implementation and Institutional Strengthening
7.
This component will support the MWE to provide the necessary management, coordination and
support for effective Project implementation. The MWE, through the WESLD, will be responsible for
overall coordination of the Project, including reporting, M&E, procuring required equipment and tools,

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

facilitating Project supervision and review missions, liaising with stakeholders, and developing crosscutting studies (including midterm reviews and audits—technical, financial, and procurement). On behalf
of the IAs, the WESLD will ensure timely compilation and review of regularly required inputs such as work
plans, PPs, progress reports, audits, and other reviews. It will also hire and manage a PST that will include
procurement specialists (2) who will work with the PDU team, accountants (2) who will work with the
Accounts Department, an M&E specialist who will coordinate the work of both IAs, and social and
environmental safeguard specialists (2) who will work with all teams to ensure good safeguards
management and compliance. Other technical specialists may be hired to support specific implementation
teams as needed, including a water resources management specialist.
Financial Management
8.
Under the MWE, the Project’s transactions will be managed within the existing setup. The
activities and transactions will be approved and authorized by the Permanent Secretary who is the
Accounting Officer. All transactions will be processed in accordance with GoU established controls and
procedures.
9.
The MWE has a fully functioning Accounts Department headed by the Assistant Commissioner of
Accounts, a qualified accountant. The department has a senior accountant and several accounts
assistants. The main accounts of the MWE are computerized with the IFMS. However, this system is only
operational for government funds, and the Project module is not yet fully operational. As a result, Project
financial reports cannot be generated directly from the IFMS. The accounting section also has a unit that
handles the WMDP that has fully qualified accounting staff. Although the unit has a large number of staff,
only three are senior (at the level of officer and above), which affects decision-making. The current WMDP
has a financial management specialist (FMS) who is qualified and experienced and is expected to be
dedicated for the Project. It also has the position of assistant FMS that fell vacant recently and will be
filled in due course. With this level of staffing, there will be sufficient hands to manage the implementation
of the Project.
10.
The MWE has an Internal Audit Unit comprising four internal auditors seconded from the
MoFPED’s Department of Internal Audit. There is also an audit committee in place at the MoFPED to which
the Internal Audit Unit reports. The committee meets quarterly to review internal audit findings and the
actions that have been taken to address them. The MWE’s Permanent Secretary ensures that action is
taken to implement internal audit recommendations and where action is not taken, the findings are also
reported in the external audit report. The audit committee closely follows up on the action taken by the
MWE as part of its oversight role. The Project’s financial statements will be audited by the Auditor General
in accordance with statutory requirements, auditing standards, and suitable ToRs. Regarding internal
controls, the internal audit function in the MWE works well. However, improvements will be required for
the Project during implementation, given the Project’s countrywide coverage. Actions are required to
improve timely submission of the MWE’s internal audit review reports and to fully operationalize the
Project module of the IFMS.
11.
For the NWSC, the Project’s transactions will be managed within its existing setup. The activities
and transactions will be approved and authorized by the Managing Director. All transactions will have to
be processed in accordance with the policies and procedures of the NWSC. The NWSC has a fully functional
Finance and Accounts Department headed by the Deputy Managing Director of Finance and Corporate

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

Strategy who is a qualified accountant. The Accounting Unit of the NWSC is computerized with Iscala
accounting systems. The NWSC also has an Internal Audit Department comprising qualified and
experienced auditors. There is also an audit committee of the board in place. The Project’s financial
statements will be audited by the Auditor General in accordance with statutory requirements, auditing
standards, and suitable ToRs. Currently, the NWSC is audited by Pannel Kerr Forster -Uganda on behalf of
the Auditor General. The accounting and internal control arrangements are sound and acceptable for the
implementation of the Project. To ensure that the Project is effectively implemented, the MWE and the
NWSC will have to ensure that appropriate staffing arrangements are maintained throughout the life of
the Project.
12.
Funds will flow from IDA to the MWE and the NWSC. For both the MWE and the NWSC, all funds
will be expended at headquarters as the activities will be implemented as a centralized project.
13.
Reporting. The MWE and the NWSC will prepare interim financial reports (IFRs) on a quarterly
basis and submit them to the World Bank no later than 45 days after the end of each calendar quarter.
Annual financial statements will be prepared in accordance with International Public Sector Accounting
Standards (which, among others, include the application of the cash basis of recognition of transactions).
Audited financial statements will be submitted to the World Bank within six months of the end of the
financial year. The statements will follow the formats used under the WMDP.
14.
For external audits, the Auditor General is primarily responsible for auditing all government
projects. Usually, the audit is subcontracted to a firm of private auditors; the final report is usually issued
by the Auditor General and based on the tests carried out by the subcontracted firm. The private firms to
be subcontracted should be among those that are acceptable to the World Bank. In case the audit is
subcontracted to a firm of private auditors, IDA funding may be used to pay for the cost of the audit. The
audits will be conducted in accordance with International Standards on Auditing.
Disbursements
15.
The Project will apply a report-based disbursement system. Initially, requests to the World Bank
for disbursements will be based on approved work plans and cash flow projections for eligible
expenditures for six months. The World Bank will make advance disbursements from the proceeds of the
credit into the Project Designated (Special) Accounts to expedite Project expenditures as evidenced by
quarterly IFRs. The MWE and the NWSC have established effective FM and accounting systems, which will
facilitate regular disbursements. The Project will need to (a) sustain satisfactory FM rating during Project
supervision; (b) submit IFRs consistent with the agreed form and content within 45 days of the end of
each reporting period - calendar quarter; and (c) submit timely and satisfactory audited annual financial
statements.
16.
Withdrawal of the Proceeds of the Financing. The Recipient may withdraw the proceeds of the
Financing to finance Eligible Expenditures; in the amount allocated and, if applicable, up to the percentage
set forth against each Category of the following table (Table 2.1)

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

Table 2.1 - Withdrawal of the Proceeds of the Financing
Category
Amount of Credit
Allocated
(expressed in
SDR)
Amount of
Grant
Allocated
(expressed in
SDR)
Percentage of
Expenditure to be
financed
(inclusive of
Taxes)
1. Goods, works, non-consulting services,
consulting services, Training and Operating Costs
under Parts 1(a), 3 and 4 of the Project
94,260,000

2. Goods, works, non-consulting services,
consulting services, Training and Operating Costs
under Part 2(a)(i) of the Project
22,680,000

3. Goods, works, non-consulting services,
consulting services, Training and Operating Costs
under Part 2(a)(ii), (iii), (iv) and (v)   of the Project
29,140,000

4. Goods, works, non-consulting services,
consulting services, Training and Operating Costs
under Part 1(b) of the Project
21,210,000
14,950,000
5. Goods, works, non-consulting services,
consulting services, Training and Operating Costs
under Part 2(b) of the Project
7,310,000
5,250,000
TOTAL AMOUNT
174,600,000
20,200,000

17.
Designated (Special) Account. The MWE and the NWSC will each establish individual U.S. dollar
denominated Designated (Special) Accounts at Bank of Uganda. The Designated (Special) Account will
receive dollar deposits/transfers from the IDA Credit Account. These funds will be used to meet U.S. dollar
payments made at the headquarters as well as to meet transfer of funds to the local currency Project
account for meeting the Uganda shilling payments. The MWE and the NWSC will open and operate local
currency Project bank accounts that will form the primary source of financing for Project activities in local
currency. The MWE and the NWSC will each be fully responsible for the management of the accounts,
including signatories. Funds flow arrangements for the Project shall be the following: IDA will make an
initial advance disbursement from the proceeds of the credit and/or grant by depositing into the
respective Designated (Special) Accounts. Actual expenditure will be reimbursed through submission of
Withdrawal Applications together with IFRs, as applicable. The MWE and the NWSC will each be
responsible for all foreign payments out of their Designated (Special) Accounts. They will also be
responsible for local currency payments out of the Project accounts. For the MWE, payments will be
approved and signed by the Accounting Officer (Permanent Secretary, MWE) as the principal signatory
and the person designated by the Accountant General who, in this case, is the Assistant CommissionerAccounts. Other designated signatories will also be signatories to the bank accounts as and when
proposed and approved. For the NWSC, there will be two categories of signatories—A and B. Category A,
which is mandatory, is the Managing Director and Category B is the Deputy Managing Director Finance

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

27.
Procurement of consultancy services. Consultants will be selected to support the design and
supervision of construction of the works as well as for stakeholder engagement, training of community
and school health clubs, review of the ESIA and the RAP of the WSS systems in refugee host communities,
and for preparation of micro-catchment management and source protection plans. Individual consultants
and/or support personnel may also be hired to augment existing capacity within the implementing line
ministries in accordance with the provisions of Paragraph 7.32 of the Procurement Regulations.
28.
Procurement of goods. Goods will include, among others, the supply of equipment for the
establishment of a fully functional national WIS, supply and installation of hydrometric equipment, and
supply of equipment and tools to support Project implementation and the WMZs.
29.
PDU staff under both the MWE and the NWSC are proficient in procurement processing under
national law, the Public Procurement and Disposal of Public Assets (PPDA) Act, but have no experience in
IDA procurement management. The PDUs manage a heavy workload under GoU funding, leading to delays
in procurement processing. The MWE’s PDU staff who supported the WMDP was transferred to another
agency. Under the proposed Project, the MWE proposes hiring a procurement specialist proficient in IDA
procurement management and an assistant procurement specialist to enhance the capacity of the PDU.
The NWSC has assigned three PDU staff to handle procurement processing under the IWMDP. The staff,
however, have no previous experience under IDA. The staff will work closely with the technical staff who
have developed capacity under the WMDP in IDA procurement processing. Both agencies will hire
additional procurement and technical staff on a needs basis where any expertise is found to be lacking to
mitigate the risk of delays.
30.
The residual risks after the implementation of the mitigation measures proposed in Table 2.2
would be reduced to Substantial.
Table 2.2. Risk Mitigation Action Plan Matrix
Risk
Mitigation Measure
Timeframe
Responsibility
PDU staff have no
experience in using
World Bank Procurement
Regulations and
Procedures and have a
heavy workload;
MWE staff have no
experience with IDAfunded procurement
Recruit a procurement consultant with
qualifications and experience acceptable to
IDA to build capacity and assist in processing
procurement activities.
Within three months of
Project effectiveness
MWE
Training and hand-holding for capacity
building of PDU and ‘new’ departments on the
World Bank Procurement Regulations and
Procedures
Throughout Project
implementation
MWE/NWSC
Delayed construction and
underestimation of the
cost of works attributed
to preparation of designs
for works during the
Project life
Costed detailed designs for two high value
works (Busia and Mbale) under the IWMDP
already in place and associated ESIA and RAP
updates to be concluded by June 2018
By Project effectiveness
MWE/NWSC
Delays in preparing
specifications, statement
of requirements, and ToR
by the User Departments
Timely identification of gaps and hiring of
experts to support the MWE to prepare
comprehensive technical requirements/ToR
which will require minimum change during
the design review
Throughout Project
implementation
MWE/NWSC

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

Risk
Mitigation Measure
Timeframe
Responsibility
Inefficiency in processing
evidenced by delays at
each stage of the
procurement cycle
Ensure minimum staff turnover of
Coordination Unit to retain the capacity built
under the WMDP;
regular top management monitoring and
follow-up of implementation
Throughout Project
implementation
MWE/NWSC
Inadequate working
area/rooms and space for
record keeping/filing
Provide sufficient working area/rooms and
space for record keeping/filing.
Within three months of
Project effectiveness
MWE
Inadequate knowledge
and skills/experience in
contract management
Conduct training on FIDIC contracts and
contract management to build contract
implementation capacity for major works and
consultancy contracts
Within six months of
Project implementation
and annually thereafter
MWE/NWSC
Inadequate deployment
of staff at contract
management stage
Client to prepare contract management plan
for each contract indicating, among others,
deployment of adequate staff in skills and
numbers including on-site presence
Throughout Project
implementation
MWE/NWSC
Limited domestic
contracting capacity to
conduct projects of this
nature, complexity, and
scope; thus, most
contracts will be done by
international firms.
Packaging to consider contracting capacity of
the potential contractors and market
sounding as well as multi-modal or wider
dissemination of bidding opportunities to
elicit participation from the capable providers;
Subconsultant/contractor and joint ventures
should be encouraged to enhance capacity of
individual firms.
Throughout Project
implementation
MWE/NWSC
Complaints due to
alleged unfairness and
interference in evaluation
and unaccounted for
arithmetic errors
resulting in delays and
denting credibility of
procurement processing
Consider adopting two envelope market
approach for high-value works contracts
subject to international competition
Throughout Project
implementation
MWE/NWSC
Delays in paying vendors
due to delays in internal
approving processes
Establish tracking system for payment
approval processes and hold staff accountable
for delays and strengthen the Internal Audit
Unit and Accounts Departments to expedite
vendor’s payment-approving process.
Throughout Project
implementation
MWE/NWSC
Borrower to learn and
adopt Procurement
Regulations July 2016 of
the World Bank NPF
Need-based procurement trainings for the
Project team including Contracts Committee
on World Bank Procurement Regulations and
NPF in general
Throughout Project
implementation
MWE/NWSC
Incomplete needs
assessment and
inadequate attention to
geophysical studies
during detailed designs
resulting in design
changes/variations during
construction and
consequently time and
cost overruns
Outcome-based needs identification approach
to contracts including comprehensive design
reviews to ensure completeness

Contracting allowing for adequate
mobilization time and at least 18 months for
construction
Throughout Project
implementation
MWE/NWSC

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

Risk
Mitigation Measure
Timeframe
Responsibility
Lack of operational funds
within the Project which
greatly affected the
contract management
function
Inclusion in budget of operational expenses
Throughout Project
implementation
MWE/NWSC
31.
Record keeping and management. For each executing agency, the head of the PDU working
closely with procurement specialists, where applicable, will be responsible for record keeping and shall
open a procurement file for each contract processed and upload the same information in the STEP. The
file should contain all documents on the procurement process in accordance with the IDA requirements
and as described in the PPDA Act. Each IA will ensure that there is adequate lockable storage space for
active files and for archiving.
32.
Disclosure of procurement information shall follow the requirements of the Procurement
Regulations subject to the market approach and selection method. In addition, the IAs shall publish an
action report on any complaints received on a quarterly basis.
33.
Fiduciary oversight by the World Bank (frequency of procurement supervision). The World Bank
shall prior review contracts as per prior review thresholds set in the PPSD/PP and participate in one
supervision mission annually to carry out a procurement post review to assess consistency and compliance
with the agreed procedures. However, the World Bank may conduct independent procurement reviews
of all the contracts financed under the credit at any time.
34.
Beneficial Ownership Pilot. The Project involves procurement within Operational Procurement
Review Committee thresholds. In such procurement, before a contract is signed, the winning bidder will
be required to complete a standard template identifying beneficial owners, who are individuals with a
controlling interest in the company. Borrowers will be required to publish beneficial ownership
information, together with other contract award information, on their websites and the World Bank’s
external website. This information will not be routinely verified by the Borrower or the World Bank.
However, the World Bank may conduct verification when triggered by integrity red flags, or in other cases
when extended due diligence is warranted.
35.
Contract management. The high-risk and high-value procurements will be identified for increased
contract management support and indicated in the PP. The agencies will develop key performance
indicators (KPIs) for the identified contracts to be monitored during actual execution of contracts. The
World Bank team will provide additional due diligence and independent review of the contract
performance of such identified procurements.
36.
Operating costs. These will be procured using the Borrower’s procurement, financial, and other
administrative procedures acceptable to the World Bank. These include costs associated with travel,
accommodation, per diems, office consumables and maintenance, motor vehicle maintenance, and
implementation support personnel, and so on. Salary top-ups, meeting allowances, sitting allowances,
and honoraria to civil/public servants and contracted consultants shall not be financed by the Project.
37.
Training and workshops. The Project will finance training and workshops, if required, based on
an annual training plan and budget which shall be submitted to the World Bank for its prior review and

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

approval. The annual training plan will identify, among other things, (a) the training envisaged; (b) the
justification for the training; (c) the personnel to be trained; (d) the duration for such training; and (e) the
estimated cost of the training. At the time of the actual training, the request shall be submitted to the
World Bank for review and approval. Upon completion of the training, the trainees shall be required to
prepare and submit a report on the training received.
Table 2.3. Thresholds for Procurement Approaches and Methods and Prior Review Thresholds
Thresholds for Procurement Approaches and Methods (US$, millions) - Goods, Works, and Non-Consulting
Services
Category
Prior Review
(US$,
millions)
Open
International
Open
National
Request for
Quotation
(RfQ) -
International
Request for
Quotation
(RfQ) - National
Works
≥5
≥5
<5
≤0.2
UGX 10,000,000 –
UGX 200,000,000
Goods, IT, and nonconsulting services
≥1.5
≥1
<1
≤0.1
UGX 5,000,000 –
UGX 100,000,000
Thresholds for Procurement Approaches and Methods (US$, millions) - Consulting Services
Category
Prior Review
(US$,
millions)
Short List of National Consultants

Consulting Services
Engineering and Construction
Supervision
Consultants (Firms)
≥0.5
≤0.2
≤0.3
Individual
Consultants
≥0.3
n.a.
n.a.
Environmental and Social (including safeguards)
38.
The IWMDP supports a range of infrastructure investments, including construction and
rehabilitation of WSS systems, IWRM measures, and rehabilitation of water quality laboratories, among
others. Water supply systems will consist of piped water supply schemes either fed by surface water
(river/lakes) or high-yield boreholes run by solar-powered. They will also include intake structures for
surface water, WTPs, storage tanks, and water mains and distribution networks. Activities related to
sanitation facilities will consist of construction, rehabilitation and expansion of wastewater lagoon
systems in Mbale municipality, FSTFs in small towns, sewer networks, and communal on-site sanitation
facilities in markets and schools. Majority of the project interventions are small to medium scale. The
largest interventions are in the Gulu Municipality (population. 300,000) with the construction of a new
surface water supply system of 30,000 m3/day and the Mbale Municipality (population. 163,314) with the
construction and rehabilitation of water supply works and sanitation facilities.

39.
The Project triggers safeguards policies on Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Involuntary
Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12), Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37), Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP
7.50), Forests (OP/BP 4.36), Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04), and Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11).

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

40.
Category Assessment. The IWMDP is assigned an EA Category B given that significant adverse
environmental and social impacts are not expected due to the nature of the proposed activities described
above, that is, interventions are mainly small to medium scale. This conclusion was based on a thorough
review of specific subprojects (Mbale WSS, Busia WSS, and Gulu Water Supply) and after taking into
account of the environmental and social screening of potential subprojects conducted under the ESMF.
The anticipated negative impacts are expected to be localized, site-specific, and ranging from small to
moderate in scale. For instance, for the Mbale and Busia sub-projects (projects with detailed designs),
significant impacts are not expected from (a) surface water abstraction on downstream users and
ecological biota because minimum EF, as in the case of Namatala River, will be maintained through
augmentation of the source and/or reducing the water services to an acceptable level; (b) biosolids
generation and treated wastewater discharges on water quality and land degradation; and (c) from influx
of labor in project areas. The same nature and scale of impacts are anticipated in Gulu and in other future
subprojects. On the Gulu subproject, the assessment concluded that the Gulu intake will not rely on the
performance of the Karuma Dam (currently under construction). In addition, the Project is expected to
have minimal land take and physical displacement of Project-Affected Persons (PAPs).

41.
In summary, the Project is not anticipated to generate any potential large scale, significant
and/or irreversible impacts, as none of the planned project activities will be in environmentally
sensitive areas. All project negative impacts are expected to be mitigated with known technology, good
practices and management solutions that will result in residual impact of minor significance. Refer to
Paragraph 46 for a summary of mitigation measures. Given the above justification of EA Cat B for IWMDP,
any subproject that will be screened as Category A will be excluded from financing unless the project is
restructured to make way for the financing of such subprojects.

42.
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01. The Project will largely generate positive impacts
contributing to public health, economic growth, and environmental sustainability through (a)
rehabilitating  and constructing  of centralized wastewater systems, faecal sludge treatment facilities, and
on-site sanitation facilities to reduce contamination of surface water, groundwater sources and drinking
water networks; (b) reducing the discharge of untreated wastewaters to land and waterways; (c)
increasing coverage and improving service quality of drinking water systems; and (d) promoting
sustainable catchment management of watersheds.

43.
As indicated above, there are no anticipated large scale, significant or irreversible negative
environmental impacts associated with the Project. However, implementation of the Project may result
in potential adverse environmental and social impacts. Potential impacts during construction may
include impacts on water bodies associated to earthworks and wastewater generated from construction
activities; emissions of particulate matter with earthworks and removal of vegetation cover, improper
handling of asbestos cement (AC) pipes, OHS risks, and social misdemeanor by workers (labor influx). The
impacts during construction phase will be temporary while works are carried out. During the operational
phase, the potential risks include unpleasant odors and noise from the operation of sanitation facilities;
sludge management and wastewater effluent discharges that exceed standards; possible impacts on
surface and/or ground water due to leakages from the facilities (sewers, manholes, ponds, and septic
tanks) because of storm flows overloading the system; and impacts of water abstraction on EFs and
aquatic ecosystems, including migratory fish species.

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

44.
Mbale WSS subproject. The likely negative environmental and social impacts for the Mbale subproject include potential impacts on freshwater biota and downstream users from reduction in minimum
EF during low flows/dry season, degradation of land and soil erosion, pollution of water resources
generation of noise improper handling of AC pipes and accessories improper management of waste
air/dust OHS risks public safety issues, pressure on existing resources, landscape and land use impacts,
social misdemeanor by construction workers, disruption of communication routes, loss and degradation
of natural habitats, disruption to public utilities, land-take, and septage disposal. There is also the impact
on natural resources of waste water treatment plants (WWTPs) in Mbale Municipality if these systems
are not adequately operated.

45.
In relation to the environmental and social impacts of the new water intake structure at the
Namatala River to feed the Bungokko WTP, the ESIA suggests enough water is available to meet water
demand by year 2040 (0.313 m3/s) for most of the year. However, Namatala’s dry weather flows in some
cases may not be sufficient to meet projected water demand and maintain an adequate EF. Therefore,
downstream users and aquatic biota could be affected if minimum EF is not maintained. In addition, the
Mbale service area may not have sufficient water to meet its water needs during the dry season.
Mitigation measures are included in Section 46 below.

46.
Busia WSS subproject: The identified impacts are like the Mbale sub-project. The impact on
hippopotamus at the WTP site was identified as a key impact that needs to be adequately mitigated. The
ESIA also highlights the potential of eutrophication in the FSTF receiving stream (i.e., Okame stream) if the
discharge effluent is not adequately managed given that there are no natural wetlands to polish the
treated effluent.

47.
All project adverse impacts are expected to be mitigated with known technology, good practices
and management solutions. The following key mitigation measures have been recommended for
implementation, and shall be incorporated in various implementation arrangements, including bidding
documents and contract’s ESMP.

a. Treated effluents from WWTPs and FSTF will not generate significant impacts if the facilities are
designed, operated and maintained according to design standards. The leakages from sewers,
sludge drying beds and wastewater stabilization ponds (proposed in Mbale Municipality only)
will be minimized by regular monitoring and maintenance of the network; connections between
sewers will be made water-tight to prevent leakages of wastewater to groundwater; and
frequent effluent quality will be monitored to avoid release of poorly treated effluents into
waterways. In addition, desludging and transportation of sludge will be safely managed by the
provision of training to sludge emptiers on safe sludge handling measures, monitoring and
enforcement of sludge handling practices, the provision of adequate transportation and
personal protective equipment, and public education campaigns about the treatment system
and the required sludge management and reuse requirements. Dried stabilized sludge from
drying beds will be used for agricultural reuse or disposed to a solid waste landfill (Mbale Landfill
and Busia Waste Disposal site) during low demand periods. Adequate training will be provided
to operators of the treatment facilities to ensure that dried stabilized sludge is only reused once
it is safe for human handling and agricultural purposes (i.e. levels of pathogenic bacteria, viruses
and protozoa reduced to appropriate levels). The FSTF in Busia will be designed to reduce and

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

treat the percolate (liquid stream) before discharging to the Okame stream. In addition, at the
discharge point, the IA will install markers and signages on the health risks of using the Okame
stream for domestic purposes, conduct community sensitization, and provide alternative water
if needed.

b. All requirements for construction of the sludge drying beds, especially for providing water
impermeable basins, efficient drainage system for leachate and flood protection structures like
cut-off drains and small embankments will be put in place when needed.

c. Unpleasant odors and noise, if any, will be mitigated by correct O&M of the plant along with
siting of the facilities away from habitations – all in line with government specifications.

d. For AC pipes, the Environmental Management Plan has included management measures for the
removal, packaging, transportation and disposal of existing asbestos waste, following additional
guidance that will be provided by NEMA for handling such hazardous materials.

e. Raw water abstractions will be designed based on technical studies to ensure safe yield from
groundwater and surface water resources. Minimum EF for Namatala and other rivers that will
be tapped by the project will be maintained and ensured. The NWSC should adhere to the safest
maximum abstractable water quantities throughout the Project life. The Namatala water intake
will be designed to allow minimum EF pass through the abstraction point. Flow monitoring
devices will be installed to monitor minimum EF by the NWSC and DWRM

f. For the Mbale subproject, before construction, the NWSC will carry out an Augmented Water
Supply Study to evaluate options to augment water source during low flows for Namatala and
assess the reliability of the proposed water supply system. The options will include, among
others, but not be limited to: (i) construction of a water impoundment structure at the Namatala
intake site to store water during high flows and sustain the water demand during the dry spell;
(ii) construction and rehabilitation of boreholes in the small towns; (iii) expansion of Manafwa
water supply system; and (iv) a reduction in water service delivery at acceptable levels. The
study will include specific recommendations and an implementation plan. Complementary and
inclusive solutions are considered, not individual solutions; therefore, the final recommendation
would likely be a combination of these options. The MWE and the NWSC will implement the
recommendations under the IWMDP.

g. Water source protection. Catchment management measures will be implemented with the aim
of conserving and allowing recharge of water resources. Community sensitization regarding the
water supply system and water conservation measures will be encouraged: saving water is an
efficient way of reducing the overuse of ground water resources. It is not only decreases the
amount of the water withdrawn, but may also reduce the threat of pollution

h. An awareness campaign will be launched for the residents about proper O&M of both WSS
facilities to reduce the introduction of grease, solid waste and other non-biodegradable
particulates into the sewerage network and on-site sanitation facilities.

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

i.
Measures to address labour influx include (i) hiring of local workforce as much as possible; (ii)
active engagement with the communities, particularly targeting the vulnerable groups including
women and girls, on raising the awareness of the potential arrival of external workers,
requirement for contractors to draft workers’ codes of conduct; (iii) inclusion of particular
conditions in works contract, such as a code of conduct outlining contractor’s responsibilities on
workplace culture, Labor Influx Management plan, and Worker’s Camp Management Plan; (iv)
mandatory training for all employees on legal conducts in local communities and legal
consequences for non-compliance, sensitizing  them not to engage in relationships with
underage girls and married women, and on issues relating to exploitation, HIV/AIDS and STDs;
and (v) maximizing the distance of the camp sites from the communities and provide provision
of services and entertainments within the camps to reduce the need to use community facilities
and interacting with the local community, as well as providing opportunities (periodic leave) for
workers to regularly return to their families.

j.
Consult the Uganda Wildlife Authority before commencement of any works at the Busia WTP
site regarding protection of the habitat of Hippopotamus. A Wildlife Management Plan has been
prepared for the project, and it should be implemented by the contractor during construction
and the operator during the operation phase of the Project.

k. In addition, even though main water and sewer pipelines will follow the right of way for roads,
road encroachment and potential works like plants, pump stations and storage tanks may have
land acquisition implications and displacement (both economical and physical) that will require
the design and implementation of RAPs. RAPs for Mbale and Busia have been conducted and
specific issues are included in Section II above.

l.
The project will also apply the World Bank Industry Specific Water and Sanitation EHS
Guidelines. In addition to this, the World Bank has put in place a set of Environmental, Social,
Health and Safety Enhancements for SPDs and Standard Bidding Documents (SBDs), which shall
be applicable for all new works contracts for which the relevant SBD/SPD are used. The
contractor ESMP is also required to include Labor Influx Management Plan and Worker’s Camp
Management Plan.

48.
Safeguards EA Instruments. Compliance will be ensured through diligent application of an ESMF
and site specific ESIAs/ ESMPs. For subprojects that have completed DEDs (Mbale WSS, including nearby
small towns) under Component 2 and Busia WSS under Component 1), site- specific ESIAs/ESMPs have
been undertaken, consulted upon, reviewed and cleared by the World Bank, and disclosed both in country
and on the World Bank external website.
49.
The Mbale ESIA was initially approved by the World Bank on July 7, 2017 and disclosed in-country
and on the World Bank's external website on February 3, 2018. Further review was undertaken by the
World Bank during March to April 2018 and the revised version was cleared by the World Bank on May 7,
2018 and redisclosed in country and on the World Bank's external website on May 8, 2018.

50.
The Busia ESIA was initially cleared by the World Bank on July 20, 2017 and disclosed in country
and on the World Bank's external website on October 13, 2017. However, three key changes in the site

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

location of the components of the system (Water Intake, WTPs and FSTF) were made and required
updates to be made to the ESIA. Those were carried out and the revised document was cleared by the
World Bank on April 26, 2018. and redisclosed in country and on the World Bank's external website on
May 3, 2018.

51.
For all other subprojects included under Components 1, 2, and 3, and for which detailed feasibility
and design studies have yet to be undertaken, the MWE prepared an ESMF, which was cleared by the
World Bank on March 16, 2018 and disclosed in-country and on the World Bank’s External Website on
March 22, 2018. The ESMF will guide all environmental and social assessments (SA) that will be
undertaken by the IEs and Contractors. The main purpose of the ESMF is to (a) establish clear procedures
and methodologies for the review, approval, and implementation of investments to be financed under
the Project; (b) specify appropriate roles and responsibilities and outline the necessary reporting
procedures for managing and monitoring environmental and social concerns related to Project
investments; (c) determine the training, capacity building, and TA needed to successfully implement the
provisions of the ESMF and the subsequent ESIAs/ESMPs, as applicable; and (d) provide practical
information on resources required to implement the ESMF requirement. The ESMF include general SAs
and specific guidelines to conduct a detailed SA as part of the site-specific ESIAs.

52.
The Project will also apply the World Bank Industry Specific Water and Sanitation EHS Guidelines.
In addition to these, the World Bank has put in place a set of Environmental, Social, Health and Safety
Enhancements for SPDs and SBDs which shall be applicable for all new works contracts for which the
relevant SBD/SPD are used. The contractor ESMP is also required to include Labor Influx Management
Plan and Worker’s Camp Management Plan.

53.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04. No significant conversion (loss) or degradation of natural habitats,
whether directly (through construction) or indirectly (through human activities induced by the project) is
anticipated through project activities. However, OP/BP 4.04 has been triggered as the project will involve
catchment management measures and some of the investments may involve afforestation, reforestation
and improvement of watersheds. In addition, most of the WSS activities will either abstract water from
rivers/lakes, which could affect EF downstream, and discharge treated wastewater effluent into
waterways, which could affect water quality and aquatic ecosystems. During construction, the civil works
may affect the waterways (turbidity, siltation, sedimentation, etc.). All subprojects will
include/encompass natural habitats assessment and mitigation under the given sub-project ESIA/ESMP
to manage impacts on any natural habitats. The project sub-component design will ensure that any
discharged effluent from project implemented wastewater or FSTFs will meet appropriate local effluent
standards for treated wastewater/fecal sludge, before discharge into the natural environment. The
project will also ensure minimum EF for rivers tapped as sources of water. If a subproject can cause
irreversible damages, it will be excluded.

54.
Forests OP/BP 4.36. OP 4.36 is triggered due to potential project impacts on health and quality
of forests, especially in the catchment areas where the project will support afforestation, reforestation
and improvement of watersheds. Compliance will be ensured through the ESMF and site-specific
ESIAs/ESMPs.

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

55.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11. The policy is triggered due to the possibility of chance
finds of physical cultural resources during construction. Any potential impacts on Physical Cultural
Resources will be addressed by incorporating reporting, handling procedures and management as part of
site specific ESIA/ESMP. PCRs inventory shall be part of the ESIA process, and appropriate mitigation
measures shall be developed under the ESMP. The Mbale RAP identifies seven graves that will have to be
relocated and includes three measures to handle displacement of graves: (a) cash compensation based
on Uganda’s approved district rates; (b) transport assistance; and (c) financial assistance for
rituals/ceremonies involved in the relocation of cultural resources. The Busia ESIA and RAP did not identify
graveyards, cultural areas, or archaeological sites. The Mbale and Busia ESIA and the project ESMF include
chance finds procedures as precautionary measures just in case there are chance finds during excavations.

56.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12. The policy is triggered because of the potential negative
social impacts that might result from the need for land acquisition and/or the loss of access to economic
assets and livelihoods due to IWRM and WSS activities. The MWE has prepared a RPF, which has been
publicly consulted upon and disclosed in-country and on the Word Bank website on March 13, 2018.

57.
Specific RAPs for the Mbale and Busia WSS projects were cleared by the World Bank in 2016.
During project preparation, the client submitted updated versions which were cleared by the World Bank
on April 17, 2018 (Mbale RAP) and on April 24, 2018 (Busia RAP) and disclosed (In-country and on the
World Bank external website) on April 26, 2018.

58.
The Project is expected to have minimal land take and physical displacement of PAPs. Most of the
works will consist of pipe installation that will lead to temporary impacts and be confined to existing road
reserves and as such, minimal land take is expected with the main impacts consisting of disruption of
economic activities. Type of assets include, for the most part, fences, walls, kiosks, and crops. Very few
homes and businesses will need relocation because of the anticipated works (i.e. reservoirs, fecal sludge
treatment, and water treatment systems). The specific RAPs indicate that for Mbale, 919 PAPs are
expected - of which four households will be physically displaced and the rest being temporarily affected
by economic displacement. For Busia, the RAP has identified 173 PAPs who will all face temporary
economic displacement.

59.
All relevant instruments (Mbale and Busia RAPs and RPF) include specific recommendation and
guidelines to mitigate the impacts on PAPs, including provision for special assistance to vulnerable
population, as well as an adequate implementation budget that includes resettlement cost, income
restoration payments, and RAP management budget. The RPF outlines the principles and legal and
institutional procedures to be followed in the event of land acquisition, impact on assets, and/or loss of
livelihoods. The RPF include general SAs and specific guidelines to conduct a detailed SA as part of the
site-specific RAPs.

60.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37. OP 4.37 is triggered as the project will finance rehabilitation and
construction of small dams (i.e. dams below 15 m in height, as per OP 4.37) identified through the
catchment planning process under Component 3, including small dams to prevent soil erosion and for
flood protection. The existing Small Dam Guidelines prepared for Uganda, and the FAO Manual on Small
Earth Dams (both disclosed) will be used to ensure adherence to generic dam safety measures. The
environmental and social impacts of these small dams will be assessed and will confirm that these dams

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

pose no or negligible risk to communities and assets. The Project will ensure qualified engineers are used
to design these dams.

61.
The Project does not support the construction or rehabilitation of large dams and subprojects do
not include structures that will rely on the performance of an existing dam or dam under construction
(DUC). The latter conclusion also applies to the Gulu Water Supply System, which was evaluated carefully
given that the intake structure would be in the backwater of the Karuma dam (a DUC). The abstraction
point of the intake would be close to the river bed and below the minimum reservoir operational level.
The proposed intake is a submerged structure, which would be designed to include protective features to
pipes, valves and associated electromechanical installations. Failure of the dam will not affect the intake
operation given that it is located upstream of the dam and the Nile river EF of 100 m3/s is more than
sufficient to maintain constant raw water flow into the intake wet well (design capacity 0.34 m3/s). The
KfW will finance the and WTPs and the World Bank would finance the associated transmission and
distribution pipelines.

62.
International Waterways OP/BP 7.50. The policy is triggered since some of the activities
encompass international waters including the River Nile and the Lake Victoria, which is part of the River
Nile Basin. In accordance with OP 7.50, on January 15, 2018, the Nile Basin Initiative notified riparian
states on behalf of the GoU and requested comments no later than March 11, 2018. Rwanda responded
with a no objection to the Project. No comments have been received from other states by the due date.
To conclude this process, a memorandum to the Regional Vice President (RVP) summarizing the results of
the Riparian Notification was submitted by the World Bank task team. The RVP cleared the memorandum.
It is not anticipated that the Project will cause appreciable harm to any of the riparian states through
water deprivation, pollution or otherwise. Neither it is anticipated that the implementation of the Project
activities will adversely change the overall quantity or quality of water flowing to or from any of the
riparian states of the concerned international waterways.

63.
Gender Analysis. A Gender Impact Study of the Water and Sanitation Sub-Sector (March 2017),
commissioned by the MWE, highlights the socioeconomic impacts of insufficient WSS facilities on women
and girls and their livelihoods. Women have long been recognized for their integral role in managing WSS
and hygiene in the household and community, as they are the primary users, collectors, transporters, and
managers of water. While women are increasingly participating in the decision making and planning
process, more still need to be done so their participation is mainstreamed and effective in all WSS
committees. Women and girls bear the heaviest burden for water collection. Long walks to water sources
trigger serious social consequences, particularly GBV, such as sexual assaults of women and girls, physical
and verbal abuses of women and children from husbands due to frustration from delays at water sources,
and limitations in women’s ability to engage in income-generating activities. Women are also affected
disproportionately from disease caused by unsafe water sources and poor hygiene practices and the lack
of adequate sanitation facilities, which contribute to women’s unwillingness to work outside of their
homes and girls not attending school for fear of harassments due to the lack of gender-segregated stalls
and proper menstrual hygiene management facilities. The Project will address these impacts along with
recommendations proposed by the study to alleviate GBV and improve gender mainstreaming. For
instance, the Project will construct infrastructure, which aims to improve accessibility to WSS, thus
reducing the overall distance that women and girls must walk for water collection. The sanitation facilities
supported by the Project will be gender segregated in schools and public spaces and will include menstrual

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

hygiene management and handwashing facilities for girls. TA will be provided to the IAs to strengthen
their capacity to train UOs, community-based organizations and local leaders on mainstreaming gender
in O&M of WSS facilities. The Project will also include community sensitization, GBV prevention, and skill
development and training activities to women to promote their participation and effectiveness in decision
making on WSS issues, supporting the GoU’s aspiration to achieve the national target of 100 percent of
WSS committees with women in key leadership positions.  In addition, the Project will support activities
to improve gender-specific M&E (for example, percentage of WSS committees with women in key
positions47).

64.
GA will be carried out as part of the specific SA process under ESIAs to examine gender-related
issues, promote gender equality, and enhance the Project’s development effectiveness. The specific GA
will include an action and monitoring plan. The GA will be based on the MWE’s WSS Gender Strategy and
the Gender Impact Study of the Water and Sanitation Sub-Sector.

65.
Labor influx. The proposed Project will apply utmost due diligence in the management and
monitoring of labor influx to minimize any potential GBV in the Project areas. The amount of labor influx
will vary by Project components as in some areas labor influx will be minimal given the type of the work
and technology could be supplied by local workforce, while in other areas works might involve labor from
outside of project areas. The ESMF includes procedures, institutional responsibilities, and mitigation
measures for screening, assessing, and managing issues related to labor influx that will be applied to all
site-specific ESIAs. Potential preventive measures include (a) sourcing local workforce as much as possible
provided skill sets are met; (b) actively engaging the communities, especially vulnerable groups on the
potential arrival of external workers, social conducts and behaviors, and grievance redress mechanisms;
(c) including particular conditions in works contract, such as a code of conduct outlining contractor’s
responsibilities on workplace culture, Labor Influx Management Plan, and Worker’s Camp Management
Plan; (d) conducting mandatory training for all employees on the legal conducts in local communities and
legal consequences for non-compliance and on ethical behavior (for example, not to engage in
relationships with underage girls and married women) as well as on issues relating to exploitation,
HIV/AIDS, and STDs; (e) maximizing the distance of the camp sites from the communities and providing
services and entertainments within the camps; (f) providing opportunities for workers to regularly return
to their families; (g) strengthening IAs’ capacity on labor influx management; and (h) liaising with Ministry
of Gender on community sensitization initiatives and trainings
66.
Citizen engagement. The Project will engage participating communities throughout the Project
cycle to foster behavior change and sustainability. The MWE’s Software Steps (Steps in Implementation
of Water and Sanitation Software Activities, 2012) will allow for systematic application of citizen
engagement activities to ensure a sense of ownership and commitment. For instance, the Project will
actively empower communities by setting up local supervision committees to provide oversight during
construction and after completion. In the refugee settlements and host communities, stakeholder
consultations will be conducted with local leaders and community members in collaboration with the
OPM and the UNHCR to build consensus on issues and approaches for the Project. Beneficiary satisfaction
surveys, including a survey specifically for the districts hosting refugees will be conducted at the Project’s
start, midterm review, and at completion. Relevant corrective actions will be monitored over the life of

47 Key positions in WSS committees are: Chairperson, Vice Chairperson, Secretary and Treasurer.

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

the Project. The Project will also establish a grievance redress system dedicated to addressing residents’
complaints related to the Project’s works.
67.
Borrower’s capacity assessment. The Project will be implemented by two IAs: the MWE and the
NWSC. Regional entities (WMZs and UOs), local governments and their partners (for example, district
officers) will support the IAs in their efforts to deliver outputs. The Project will utilize similar
implementation arrangements as those setup for the ongoing WMDP. The MWE and NWSC have
satisfactorily implemented WSS and water resources management projects with the WMDP and have
accumulated extensive experience with respect to implementation of World Bank safeguards procedures.
The IAs will be responsible for the preparation and implementation of safeguards instruments, as well as
overall compliance with relevant national safeguards regulations and World Bank safeguard policies.
68.
A rapid assessment of the capacity of the IAs revealed acceptable and satisfactory levels of
technical know-how for planning, design, and implementation of WSS and water resources management
investments and TA. There are four qualified safeguards staff in each IA responsible for day-to-day
implementation and supervision of safeguards requirements for the Project. There is also a Safeguard
Coordinator who will provide technical advice; consolidate the progress reports from the Project
safeguards specialists; monitor the implementation of the ESMF, the RPF, and specific safeguards
documents; and liaise with the WMZs and other stakeholders (national, regional and district) on
environmental and social issues related to the Project. The assessment indicates that there are dedicated
and qualified staff to carry out safeguards activities. The proposed safeguards team will manage both the
current WMDP and IWMDP for an estimated overlapping period of six months, as the WMDP closes while
the IWMDP is launched. The assessment concluded that there is not a need to add additional safeguards
staffing at the MWE and NWSC given that the WMDP is closing in December 2018 and a projected low
work load in 2018 for the IWMDP given the effectiveness period and planning phase. However, the World
Bank team in coordination with the IAs will monitor and assess the need of additional staff and periodic
safeguards capacity enhancement during implementation support missions.
69.
The ESMF/RPF includes a section on implementation arrangement with the roles and
responsibilities of key actors, TA to support the capacity needs of the IAs and supporting organizations
(local government, consultants and contractors), and a detailed budget for the implementation of the
ESMF/RPF and other social and environmental aspects. At least two training events per year will be
conducted and they will be tailored to different target groups, including national IAs, local and regional
supportive structures, and contractors and supervision consultants. The ESMF includes tailored training
and workshop programs. The Borrower is committed to implement the institutional strengthening and
capacity building aspects included in the ESMF and RPF and the World Bank will ensure that adequate
budget is allocated to implement all proposed safeguards measures. The Contractors and Supervision
Consultants shall be required to include on their teams, qualified safeguards Staff (Environmental
Specialist, Health and Safety Officer, Social Development Specialist).
70.
Public consultations. To ensure that key interests of the public are addressed and incorporated
into the design and implementation of the IWMDP safeguard tools, stakeholder consultations were
carried out as part of the ESMF, RPF, and specific ESIA/RAP preparation processes. Consultations were
undertaken using key informant interviews and focus group discussions. Questionnaires were developed
to guide the discussions and community meetings were held at the village level.

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

71.
For the ESMF and RPF, the main stakeholders identified and consulted include the MWE; NWSC;
NEMA; UNHCR; Ministry of Gender Labour and Social Development; water NGOs; local government
representatives; community leaders; local communities; and water service providers. The consultations
for the ESMF and RPFs were conducted between January 15-25, 2018.

72.
During the Mbale ESIA and RAP preparation, consultative meetings were held with NEMA; MWE
officials; Ministry of Gender Labor and Social Development; Mbale District local government and
municipality officials; and the project-affected communities. Consultations were conducted in 2015, 2016
and in January and February 2018.

73.
During the Busia ESIA and RAP preparation, meetings and consultations were undertaken with
project-affected communities (including in Maduwa A Village, Okame-Abochet Village, and settlements
along the transmission pipeline), Busia District and Municipal Council Administration in 2015, 2016 and
February and March 2018.

74.
The results of the consultations are captured in the safeguards instruments. Overall, community
members were supportive of the Project and indicated that they hoped to see the timely completion of
the works. Concerns highlighted in the consultations relate to displacement of households, land
availability and ownership, land conflict, and employment opportunities from works contract. Stakeholder
feedback gathered through these meetings informed the final versions of the safeguards documents. Land
availability is one of the key aspects looked at during the environmental and social screening and impact
assessment. All subprojects shall therefore be screened to confirm availability of land before proceeding
with its preparation. Another concern is building capacity within local agencies on safeguards
management. These concerns will be addressed in the IWMDP through the various training and capacitybuilding initiatives proposed under Component 4 (institutional strengthening) and budgeted for under the
ESMF.
Monitoring and Evaluation
75.
The IAs will be responsible for monitoring and reporting. The MWE and the NWSC will lead data
collection and compilation analysis. A Project Liaison Officer will be appointed within the MWE to lead the
overall coordination effort in the collection and consolidation of progress reports submitted by each of
the MWE’s departments that are directly involved in Project implementation (RWSSD, UWSSD, and
DWRM) and the NWSC. Monitoring and reporting will focus on key performance data from specific Project
activities that contribute to the Project’s intermediate results and PDO-level outcomes.
76.
Data collection and reporting. Progress reports will be submitted on a quarterly basis by the
MWE’s departments and the NWSC to the WESLD. The WESLD will coordinate with the Planning
Department of the MWE to ensure results inform sector-wide reporting, decision-making, and
supervision. The WESLD will submit progress reports every semester to the World Bank. To the extent
possible, client satisfaction surveys will also be conducted each quarter to monitor the level of client
satisfaction with the quality of service. A midterm review will be carried out to evaluate implementation
progress and identify potential issues in need of attention and resolution. An end-of-project evaluation
will also be conducted two months before Project closing to assess whether the intermediate results and
PDO-level indicators were achieved, the sustainability of the results, and lessons learned.

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

77.
An integrated M&E system will be developed and implemented as part of the Project to support
implementation and reporting. The MWE, NWSC, and other agencies are currently collecting sector
performance data in different databases and monitoring platforms. The MWE utilizes the Water Supply
Database, Water Supply Atlas, and the UPMIS. The MWE utilizes operations and financial tracking systems
at its headquarters and district levels. The OPM utilized the Refugees Response Portal. The OPM is also
currently developing a new refugee database and service provider performance monitoring and tracking
system. The new integrated M&E system will interface with various systems to consolidate data storage
and facilitate information management. Specific Project information related to procurement,
disbursements, and environmental and safeguards implementation will also be integrated in the new
M&E system. The development and implementation of this M&E system is expected to be centralized at
the MWE.
Climate Mitigation and Adaptation Co-benefits
78.
An assessment of climate co-benefits for the Project was conducted for Components 1 to 3. A
quantitative analysis was conducted to estimate the Project's impact on GHG emissions and to value the
externality using the shadow price of carbon (Annex 4). For each component, GHG emissions were
estimated in tCO2eq using the World Bank Water Global Practice’s GHG Accounting Excel Tool. The net
emissions of the Project were estimated at −8,124 tCO2eq. The Project's main contribution to reducing
emissions will be through replacing water supply tanker trucks with piped systems in refugee host
communities. A qualitative assessment of the climate mitigation and adaptation co-benefits was also
conducted based on the information available for each component. The Project has additional measures
in place to contribute to the reduction of GHG and to reduce the vulnerability of WSS systems to climate
change.
Table 2.4. Climate Mitigation and Adaptation Co-Benefits
Components
Adaptation
Mitigation
Subcomponent 1.1: Support to
Small Towns and Rural Growth
Centers
Construction and rehabilitation of water
supply systems because the design
incorporates climate change considerations
and is coupled with water source and
catchment protection

Sensitization activities such as water
conservation and water resources
management

Subprojects will mitigate the impacts of
water scarcity and droughts by constructing
and expanding water supply systems.

Improved sanitation facilities will lower
the risk of spreading cholera during periods
of flooding.
The reduction of NRW and the
replacement of pumps and other
equipment with more energy-efficient
equipment will reduce the energy
consumption per unit of water supplied to
customers.

Mitigation benefits from using gravity fed
instead of pumped systems or solar
pumped piped water supply systems
instead of diesel generation.
Subcomponent 1.2: Support to
Districts Hosting Refugee
Construction and rehabilitation of water
supply systems because the design
incorporates climate change considerations
and is coupled with water source and
Emissions reduction will be through
replacing water supply tanker truck use
with piped systems in refugee host
communities.

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

Components
Adaptation
Mitigation
catchment protection

Sensitization activities such as water
conservation and water resources
management

Subprojects will mitigate the impacts of
water scarcity, and droughts by
constructing and rehabilitation water
supply system.

Improved sanitation facilities will lower
the risk of spreading cholera during periods
of flooding.

The reduction of NRW and the
replacement of pumps and other
equipment with more energy-efficient
equipment will reduce the energy
consumption per unit of water supplied to
customers.

Mitigation benefits from using gravity fed
instead of pumped systems or solar
pumped piped water supply systems
instead of diesel generation.
Component 2: WSS Large
Towns and Support to Districts
Hosting Refugee
Benefits can be assigned to construction
and rehabilitation of water supply systems
because it incorporates climate change
considerations in the design of the WSS and
is coupled with water source and
catchment protection

Sensitization activities such as water
conservation and water resources
management

Subprojects will mitigate the impacts of
water scarcity and droughts, which are
linked to climate change
The reduction of NRW and the
replacement of pumps and other
equipment with more energy-efficient
equipment will reduce the energy
consumption per unit of water supplied to
customers.
Component 3: Water
Resources Management
Adaptation co-benefits can be assigned to
water resource management because it is
considered an adaptation measure against
climate risks such as water scarcity and
flooding
IWRM improves overall planning and
sustainability of water systems, which
results in delaying or avoiding construction
of new water systems and therefore
reduces GHG emissions.

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

ANNEX 3: IMPLEMENTATION SUPPORT PLAN

Strategy and Approach for Implementation Support
1.
The World Bank task teams will support implementation of the IWMDP. The type and level of
support will be guided by the scope of the Project, the activities in each component, relative risks involved,
and the institutional capacity of the government counterpart. Implementation support by the World Bank
will consist of semiannual full supervision missions, short technical missions, meetings and audio
conferences between the World Bank and relevant IAs, and close coordination with the World Bank’s staff
in Kampala. Because this is the first year that the World Bank is rolling out the IDA 18 Sub-Window for
RHC, it is expected that extensive coordination with the UNHCR, humanitarian organizations, DPs, and
local authorities as well as stakeholder engagements will be required throughout implementation. Field
visits to key construction and rehabilitation sites will be conducted during supervision missions. Additional
support will also be provided by the World Bank’s procurement, FM, and safeguards specialists, most of
whom will be based in the Kampala office, on Project contracts and overall compliance with safeguard
and fiduciary requirements. In addition, the Project will support international technical experts to advise
the GoU and to provide technical support to the IAs as they develop ToRs, design and feasibility studies.
This Implementation Support Plan is indicative and may be revised during Project implementation based
on emerging Project challenges and field conditions.
Implementation Support Plan
2.
Semiannual supervision missions and short follow-up technical missions will focus on the
following areas:
•
Strategic support. Supervision missions will meet with national and local authorities to (a)
review progress on the Project’s activities; (b) discuss strategic alignment of the Project’s
different activities, especially at the planning level between the relevant stakeholders; and
(c) evaluate progress on cross-cutting issues such as M&E, training, communication,
dissemination of Project results and experiences, and coordination between relevant
stakeholders. Additional meetings will also be conducted with UN agencies, humanitarian
organizations, and DPs on updates on the refugee situation in the country including WSS
challenges and opportunities and the programs supported by different DPs. These meetings
will ensure overall coordination efforts and continued strategic alignment of the Project with
the government’s mandates and policies on refugees.
•
Technical support. Supervision will concentrate on ensuring the technical quality of bidding
documents, evaluation reports, and construction plans. During construction and
commissioning, technical supervision will be provided to ensure that technical contractual
obligations are met. Regular site visits will be carried out during Project implementation and
will involve technical specialists, as needed. Moreover, TA including capacity building and
institutional strengthening will be provided to enhance performance of the service provision
structure, to develop policy in support of effective service delivery, and to prepare for
commercial financing at the NWSC.

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

•
Fiduciary support. Supervision of procurement and FM support will be carried out by the
World Bank semiannually to (a) perform desk reviews of Project IFRs and audit reports,
following up on any issues raised by auditors, as appropriate; (b) assess the performance of
control systems and arrangements; (c) update the FM rating in the FM Implementation
Support and Status Report as needed; (d) provide training and guidance on carrying out
procurement processes in compliance with the Procurement and Anti-Corruption Guidelines
and the OM; (e) work with the internal audit units at the MWE and NWSC to enhance their
capacity in procurement and FM to facilitate Project implementation; (f) review
procurement documents and provide timely feedback to the MWE and NWSC; (g) carry out
the post review of procurement actions; and (h) help monitor Project progress against the
PP.
•
Safeguards support. The coordination begun during preparation would continue throughout
Project implementation, especially to ensure that relevant safeguards concerns are included
in the works financed under Components 1 and 2 through due diligence from applications
of the site-specific ESIAs, ESMPs, and RAPs and effective mitigation measures. Supervision
from the World Bank safeguard specialists will take place every quarter and close
communication will be maintained if requested by the Government.
Table 3.1. Implementation Support Resource Estimates
Time
Focus
Skills Needed
Resource Estimates
(Staff Weeks)
First 12
months
Project rollout, management, and
implementation support coordination
TT leads
8 per TTL per year
Confirm subcomponent activities and quality
of detailed designs
TT leads
2 per TTL per year
Social safeguards, including site-specific GA
and labor influx screening and risk mitigation
measures
Social specialist
6 per year
Technical and procurement training, review
of ToR and bidding document
TT leads, technical
specialists, procurement
specialist
10 per year
Fiduciary arrangements and FM systems
FM specialist
3 per year
Operational support
Operations officer
6 per year
12 to 72
months
Procurement review and feedback of bidding
documents and consultant contracts,
including conditional clauses on labor influx
Procurement specialist
5 per year
Technical review of ToR, technical
reports, and bidding documents
TT leads, technical
specialists
10 per year
Non-lending TA, capacity and institutional
strengthening efforts
TT leads, technical
specialists
8 per year
FM supervision
FM specialist
3 per year
Social safeguards - supervision
Social specialist
4 per year
Environmental safeguards - supervision
Environmental specialist
4 per year

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

Time
Focus
Skills Needed
Resource Estimates
(Staff Weeks)
Project management, M&E, and project
supervision coordination
TT leads, technical
specialists
10 per year
Operational support, M&E, lessons learned,
progress, and final reporting
Technical specialists and
operations officer
8 per year
Note: TT = Task team. TTL = Task team leader.
Table 3.2. Skill Mix Requirements
Skill Needs for Supervision
Comment
Task team leaders
HQ and country based
WSS specialists
HQ and country based, or other regions
Water resource management specialists
HQ and country based, or other regions
Institutional specialists
HQ and country based, or other regions
PPP and finance specialists
HQ or other regions
Utility performance specialists
HQ or other regions
Water engineers
HQ and country based, or other regions
FM specialist
Country based
Procurement specialist
Country based
Social specialist
Country based
Environmental specialist
HQ and country based
Gender specialists
HQ and country based, or other regions
M&E specialists
HQ and country based, or other regions
Economists
HQ or other regions
Lawyers
HQ and country based
Table 3.3. Partners
Institutions
Country
MWE
Uganda
NWSC
Uganda
OPM
Uganda
UNHCR
Multilateral

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

ANNEX 4: FINANCIAL AND ECONOMIC ANALYSIS

1.
This annex presents two different evaluations: (a) an economic and financial evaluation of the
Project and (b) a financial evaluation of the service operators (the NWSC and the UWAs). The first
evaluation measures whether the Project is justified, that is, if expected benefits are higher than the
Project’s costs. The second evaluation examines the financial sustainability of the investments, studying
the NWSC’s and UWAs’ financial and operational capacity to maintain and operate the works. The second
evaluation also examines the capacity of the NWSC to assume a portion of the IDA credit.
2.
The economic evaluation was carried out for interventions under Components 1 and 2.
Investment costs of Components 3 and 4 were added proportionally given their importance to the
successful implementation of the interventions.
A.  Economic and Financial Analysis of the Project
Methodology
3.
The economic evaluation is based on a quantitative CBA. The evaluation was carried out from
financial and economic perspectives to test the financial sustainability and economic viability of the works.
The financial evaluation included costs and benefits at the price paid or received by the providers, while
the economic evaluation included cost and benefits to society. Financial prices were transformed to
economic prices to eliminate market distortions caused by taxes and subsidies among other factors. A
value added tax of 18 percent was used to transform financial prices to economic prices.
4.
Although the Project will support the implementation of several sanitation works, this evaluation
was conducted including only benefits from water interventions and applying them to the total
investment cost (including sanitation).
5.
Financial benefits were estimated as the increase in revenues and gains from efficiency
improvements. The economic and financial analysis of the Project was closely coordinated with the
financial analysis at the utility level to determine the impact of the Project on the utility.
6.
The evaluation was conducted using 2017 prices and assuming a 20-year lifetime, a 6 percent
discount rate, and an exchange rate of UGX 3,596 to US$1.
Current Situation of Water Service
7.
According to the 2015 National Service Delivery Survey (NSDS), about 25 percent of the
population in the dry season and 13 percent of the population in the wet season relies on
unprotected/unsafe water sources. Less than 20 percent obtains drinking water from piped systems or
public taps. About 50 percent relies on boreholes, protected springs, and gravity flow schemes. Household
members also have to travel a considerable distance to access safe water sources.

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

Table 4.1. Households by Water Source for Drinking
Water Sources
Dry Season (%)
Wet Season (%)
Piped water in dwelling
2.4
2.2
Piped water in compound
5.1
4.1
Piped water outside compound
0.0
0.0
Public tap
9.5
7.2
Borehole/protected springs and gravity flow schemes
57.7
46.2
Rainwater
0.5
26.6
Bottled water
0.3
0.3
Total safe sources
75.5
86.6
Unprotected sources
Lake/river/stream/pond/dam
22.2
12.1
Other
2.3
1.3
Total other sources
24.5
13.4
Total
100.0
100.0
Source: UBOS on behalf of the Ministry of Public Service (MoPS), NSDS, 2015 Report.
Table 4.2. Households by Distance to Safe Water Sources
Distance (km)
Rural (%)
Urban (%)
Total (%)
0.0 to 0.5
55.3
75.5
59.5
0.51 to 1
22.3
14.8
20.8
1.01 to 1.5
4.5
2.4
4.0
1.51 to 3
13.2
5.2
11.5
Above 3.0
4.7
2.1
4.2
Total
100.0
100.0
100.0
Source: UBOS on behalf of the MoPS, NSDS, 2015 Report.
8.
Households also spend considerable time waiting in line to fill their containers. According to the
NSDS, in rural areas, the average time for collecting water varies from 50 minutes per day in the wet
season to 68 minutes per day in the dry season. In urban areas, times vary from 29 minutes to 42 minutes
per day. Households collect about 67 L per day in both seasons.
Table 4.3. Average Time to Drinking Water Sources

Dry Season
Wet Season

Rural
Urban
Rural
Urban
Waiting time at water source (minutes)
Time taken to and from water source (minutes)
Total water collection time (minutes)
Average amount of water used per day (L per household)
Source: UBOS- on behalf of the MoPS, NSDS, 2015 Report.

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

9.
Many of the water points are privately managed and provide water at high prices. According to
information collected in the field, the price paid per 20 L jerrycan varies from UGX 500 to UGX 1,000. This
translates into monthly payments per household from UGX 50,000 to UGX 100,000 (approximately
US$14–28). These prices are significantly higher than the NWSC’s price of UGX 31 per jerrycan, which
corresponds to monthly water payments of about UGX 3,200 per month (67 L per household per day).
Benefits
10.
Economic benefits included in the evaluation were (a) savings in monthly water payments; (b)
savings in travel time; and (c) reduction of treatment costs. The benefits were measured as follows:
Savings in Monthly Water Payments
11.
The Project will reduce or eliminate the need to buy water from private vendors. The NWSC has
a universal tariff that will be applied. If the operator belongs to a UWA, a community-based model, or a
private operator, tariffs will cover O&M costs of the system. In all cases, the cost after the Project will be
lower than the current prices paid for water needs.
12.
Savings were estimated as the difference between current prices paid for water needs compared
to post-intervention water bills. Information on current prices paid for water needs was obtained from
interviews with the population, information provided by community leaders, and information collected at
water sites. Information on post-intervention water bills was based on the NWSC’s actual tariffs and the
operating costs of the new water systems.
13.
For the without-Project scenario, monthly payments were estimated based on a consumption of
67 L per household per day and the average price paid per jerrycan in each locality. For the with-Project
scenario, monthly bills were estimated according to the tariff charged by the operator. For piped water
connections, bills were estimated based on monthly consumption per household (about 10 m3) and the
NWSC’s current tariff per cubic meter. For standpipes, the bill was based on the number of jerrycans, and
the current NWSC tariff per jerrycan. For localities not serviced by the NWSC, the monthly bill was
estimated assuming the tariff equaled operating costs.
Saving Time Spent Fetching Water
14.
The time spent fetching water will be reduced or eliminated.48 Households’ time was valued
regardless of whether the time was paid or unpaid. Women and children are largely responsible for
fetching water. Although they often do not have paid jobs, their time is valuable because it contributes to
human welfare. The valuation of children’s time is important because it affects the trade-off between
children’s economic contribution to households and school attendance. Women’s time is also important
because it affects the daily activities of all members of the family.
15.
According to the NSDS, the average amount of water fetched per household per day is 67 L, or 3.3
jerrycans. Interviews revealed that two people per household were responsible for water collection.
Information from the NSDS indicated that the time spent walking and waiting in line varied from 29

48 A few beneficiaries residing in informal areas will be served through standpipes located close to their houses at a distance
always lower than 500 m.

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

minutes to 68 minutes depending on the season (dry or wet) and the area (rural or urban). The value of
time was estimated using the average monthly income in the targeted areas, UGX 227,832.49 For the withProject scenario, the beneficiaries using standpipes are expected to reduce their walking and waiting time
to 15 minutes.50
16.
The value of time for the without-Project scenario was forecasted using current figures from the
NSDS on the time spent fetching water.
Health Impacts
17.
Health impacts were not measured due to lack of information.
Environmental Impacts
18.
The valuation of GHG emissions generated by the Project were measured using the shadow price
of carbon.
19.
Financial benefits consisted of increased revenue from an increased number of customers and
higher levels of water billed.
Costs
20.
About 97 percent of the Project’s investments will be in water and 3 percent will be in sanitation.
O&M costs were based on operating costs of existing systems and those generated by the Project.
A.1. Component 1
21.
The evaluation was conducted for interventions in a rural area (Nyamugasani) and interventions
in refugee settlements. Additionally, the analysis incorporated the results of cost-effectiveness analyses
previously conducted for solar pumping systems in Uganda.
Rural Subcomponent
22.
This subcomponent consists of (a) gravity flow schemes for the Nyamugasani water system
(Kasese district) and the Bitsya water system (Buhweju district) and (b) solar-powered water systems in
select rural communities.
Nyamugasani Water System
23.
The Project area consists of the following sub-counties in the Kasese district:51 Kyarumba, Kyondo,
Mukunyu, Muhokya, Lake Katwe, and Kisinga. The total population is about 229,000. In the Project area,

49 The average income corresponded to small towns around Mbale, according to Mbale-Environmental Report ESIA ScopingDecember 2016. The report presents the following figures for the average monthly income at 2015 prices in the growth centers
around Mbala: UGX 87,000 in Tirinyi and Kibuku, UGX 181,000 in Butaleja and Busolwe, and UGX 486,000 in Budaka. The
average income weighted by population and transformed to 2017 prices corresponds to UGX 227,832.
50 Feasibility study.
51 Most of the information was taken from ACES Consulting Group Ltd. Environmental Social Impact Statement for the

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

59 percent of the population uses open water sources, 24 percent uses boreholes, and the rest depends
on protected springs and open wells. Only 2 percent has access to piped water. Most of the residents (64
percent) have to travel over 500 m to access their water sources and 86 percent use less than one jerrycan
per person per day (approximately 10 L per person per day). This level of consumption indicates the
difficulty of accessing water sources. Existing water stand taps are active only some days of the week.
Water on these taps does not flow during the dry season, leaving the communities dependent on polluted
lake water or purchasing relatively clean water from locals at UGX 2,000 per 20 L jerrycan. Kasese is among
the four districts that contribute to 61 percent of the cholera cases in the country.
24.
The expected cost of the intervention is US$9.9 million. The first phase will benefit a population
of 129,890 or about 25,000 households. The investment cost per connection is about US$400.
Economic Benefits
25.
Prices paid for water. For the without-Project scenario, the price paid was calculated using the
actual figures of prices paid in the Project area. For the ‘with-Project scenario’, the price corresponds to
the bill the beneficiaries will pay for service, which is based on a tariff that covers operating costs.
26.
Savings in travel time. The without-Project scenario assumed the following: (a) minimum income
per household of UGX 136,000 per month52 and (b) about 1 hour per day spent fetching water. After the
Project, beneficiaries utilizing standpipes will only spend 15 minutes fetching water. Beneficiaries with
piped water connections will no longer need to fetch water.
27.
Expected savings in both price paid for water and savings in travel time per household will vary
from UGX 400,000 to UGX 700,000 per year depending on the type of service received.
Table 4.4. Coping Costs of Getting Water and Value of Time (UGX, thousands per Household per Year)

Before the Project
After the Project

Without Water
Service
With Water
Service
Standpipes
With Water Service
Value of time
—
Price paid for water

28.
Results show that interventions in Kasese will generate benefits of US$37 million, 88 percent of
which corresponds to savings in travel time and 12 percent to savings in price paid for water, during the
lifetime of the interventions.
Table 4.5. Present Value of Benefits - Nyamugasani

Present Value (US$,
thousands)
%
Value of time
32,692
Price paid for water
4,516

Nyamugasani Water Supply and Sanitation System in Kasese District.
52 Which corresponds to the minimum wage, as the main occupation in the region is in the agriculture sector.

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

Present Value (US$,
thousands)
%
Total
37,208

Results of the Economic Evaluation
29.
The results of the economic evaluation show net benefits of US$23.8 million with a return of 28.6
percent. Benefits are about three times the costs.
Table 4.6. Results of Economic Evaluation - Nyamugasani

Present Value of Flows (US$, thousands)
IRR (%)
Costs
Benefits
Net Benefits
Interventions in Nyamugasani
13,368
37,208
23,840
28.6

Financial Evaluation
30.
The operation of the works for rural and small towns will be implemented under the UWA model.
In this model, the following guidelines will be applied to ensure financial sustainability: all connections
will be metered, the tariff should cover O&M costs, the UWA will be responsible for overall management
and supervision of the WSS activities, and the operation will be awarded to a private operator and
overseen by the UWAs.
31.
Under this model, the GoU is planning on gradually making the water supply systems selffinancing. The UOs will collect reliable data to estimate tariffs that not only fully cover O&M costs, but
also include a percentage to contribute to their investment and overhead costs. Each scheme will have its
own tariff according to the type of system (GFS or pumping system) and source of energy:
solar/grid/diesel. For a certain time, UWA staff and investments (for example, major repairs and
electromechanical components) will be subsidized. To avoid unaffordable tariffs, pro-poor progressive
tariffs will be introduced.
32.
The financial evaluation, following current GoU guidelines, was run using a tariff that covers
operating cost. Results show that revenues will cover operating expenses, leaving a margin of 4 percent
to fund investment. However, at this point, the tariffs and operating costs are preliminary. During
implementation, a detailed financial evaluation will be conducted using reliable data on operating cost to
determine the required tariffs.
Table 4.7. Results of Financial Evaluation - Nyamugasani

Present Value of Flows (US$, thousands)

Costs
Revenues
Net Margin
Including investment and O&M
15,024
6,067
(8,957)
Including only O&M
5,823
6,067

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

Solar and Water Initiative
33.
This scheme supports the construction of water systems that utilize solar energy. Solar-powered
schemes are often financially, operationally, and environmentally superior to diesel-powered generators.
In Uganda, imported solar panels are not taxed, there is technical expertise in the private sector, and
donors have given wide support to solar solutions.
34.
The specifics of the solar-powered systems financed by the Project will be established during
implementation. This evaluation reviewed cost-effectiveness analyses that compared costs of solarpowered schemes with diesel-powered generators in Uganda. Results showed that although solarpowered schemes have higher investment costs, they are the least-cost option given that O&M costs are
about a third of diesel generators’ energy costs.
35.
Since 2002, the GoU has been implementing the World Bank-funded, three-phased Energy for
Rural Transformation project. The Project assists the MWE in improving water supply services by
identifying and providing least-cost energy solutions (including solar power) to water schemes in remote,
off-grid areas. A financial and economic analysis conducted for the water schemes supported under the
project showed that the O&M costs for diesel were US$0.27 per m3 of water pumped with associated
energy costs of US$0.42 per kWh. By comparison, O&M costs for solar photovoltaics were only US$0.07
per m3 with energy costs of US$0.116 per kWh.
36.
The 2016 Amstrong and Nakafeero53 life cycle analyses indicate that long-term savings on fuel and
capital maintenance make solar pumping systems more cost-effective than alternative mechanized
pumping systems. The 2017 Humanitarian Aid and Civil Protection Report54 showed similar results.
Although the investment costs are higher for solar than for the fuel-generated schemes, the study
concluded that operating costs are significantly lower for solar schemes. The total cost of the solar
alternatives assessed were 66 percent lower than the diesel generators’ costs. The average breakeven
point for solar investments was only of 1.1 years, and its operating cost was just one-third of the
generators. When analyzing the costs of the solar-powered systems already in operation in Uganda, the
study showed that the average breakeven point for a solar investment versus a stand-alone generator
was 2.6 years. The average reduction of expenses in installation and O&M costs was estimated at 40
percent. The Humanitarian Aid and Civil Protection team found that the single most important barrier
toward successful ‘solarization’ of water points is the low level of technical expertise on solar energy
among WASH stakeholders. To cope with this problem, the Central Government/MWE through the Rural
Water and Sanitation Department (RWSD) will lead implementation of this activity.
Support to Districts Hosting Refugees
37.
This subcomponent will focus on the northern districts of Yumbe, Arua, Moyo, and Lamwo, which
have several hosting communities and refugee settlements. The subcomponent is expected to serve the
design population of approximately 485,939 people (83 percent from host communities and 17 percent

53 Amstrong, A., and R. Nakafeero. Using Solar Water Pumping for Development-oriented Relief in Refugee Settings in Uganda.
39th WEDC International Conference, Kumasi, Ghana, 2016. Briefing Paper 2500.
54 Humanitary Aid and Civil Protection. Visit Report-Solar Water Systems. Refugee Settlements in Northern Uganda-January 10
to February 6, 2017.

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

refugees). The total cost of the intervention, which includes catchment management and restoration
activities, is US$72 million. The investment cost per person is US$148.
38.
According to the UNHCR, the total amount of water in refugee settlements in Uganda is about 16
L per capita per day (lpcd), which is lower than the recommended 20 lpcd. Access to safe water sources is
difficult. Most of the water systems consist of deep boreholes (71 percent). Water is collected from point
water sources. About 23 percent of the water supplied in the refugee settlements comes from water
trucks.
39.
The communities face numerous challenges given the lack of water. For example, the people of
Lomunga Trading Centre in Kululu Sub-county in Yumbe District have one borehole that is 300 m away
from the center. During dry spells, the borehole is crowded, and women and children have to wake up at
2 a.m. to walk over 3 km to alternative unprotected water sources around their villages. Women and
young girls have been raped and sexually harassed in the process. In areas where safe water sources are
insufficient (for example, Yumbe, which has 45 percent access), most of the people must look for
alternative water sources, most of which are unprotected (wells, streams, and rivers) and unsafe for
human consumption. In normal situations when communities have a protected source close to them, they
have to pay a flat fee of up to UGX 1,000 per month per household for water, but when there is no
protected water source nearby, people pay water vendors between UGX 1,000 and UGX 5,000 for a 20 L
jerrycan of water.
Economic Benefits
40.
Prices paid for water. For the without-Project scenario, the prices were estimated considering that
23 percent of the water for the refugees is provided through trucks. Although the refugees are not
charged, the MWE has to pay the transportation costs. The rest of the water is bought from private
vendors at prices ranging from UGX 1,000 to UGX 5,000 per 20 L jerrycan. For this evaluation, a price of
UGX 1,000 per jerrycan was used to be on the conservative side. For the with-Project scenario, the price
corresponded to the bill they will pay for service after the intervention.
41.
Savings in travel time. Savings were estimated assuming the following: (a) household minimum
incomes of UGX 136,000 per month55 and (b) 56 minutes per day spent fetching water.56 After the Project,
beneficiaries utilizing standpipes will only spend 15 minutes fetching water. Beneficiaries with piped water
connections will no longer need to fetch water.
Results of the Economic Evaluation
42.
The results of the economic evaluation show net benefits of US$80,304 million with a return of
17.2 percent. The benefits are about twice as much as the costs.

55 Which corresponds to the minimum wage, because the main occupation in the region is in the agriculture sector.
56 NSDS.

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

Table 4.8. Results of Economic Evaluation - Refugee Settlements and Host Communities

Present Value of Flows (US$, thousands)
IRR (%)
Costs
Benefits
Net Benefits
Refugee and host communities
99,520

179,824

80,304

17.2

Financial Evaluation
43.
At present, the refugees do not pay for water; so, no financial evaluation was carried out.
A2. Component 2
44.
This component will improve WSS services in Mbale, Adjumani, and Gulu. This evaluation was
conducted for interventions in Mbale and Adjumani.
Mbale Water System
45.
A population of about 380,000 inhabitants resides in the Project area, which consists of (a) the
Municipality of Mbale; (b) surrounding areas through the north, northwest, and south; and (c) six small
towns (Busolwe, Butaleja, Kadama, Budaka, Kibuku, and Tirinyi).
46.
In Mbale Town, the NWSC provides service. Only 32 percent of the population is served with water
and 14 percent with sewerage connections. The water service relies on two WTPs, Bungokho and
Manafwa, whose capacity is not enough to serve the population. The catchment areas (Manafwa, Nabijo,
and Nabuyonga intakes) suffer from frequent silting, especially during the rainy season, as well as
increasing treatment and maintenance costs. The piped network is not working properly, presenting
frequent bursts and leakages. As part of the sewerage system, there are two WWTPs, Doko treatment
ponds and Namatala Wetland, built in 1968 and 1986, respectively. Even though they are in fair condition,
they are facing problems related to lack of proper maintenance and high levels of infiltration when it rains.
47.
There are six small towns, with a population of about 67,000 inhabitants, that are also included
in the Project. The major sources of water in the towns include boreholes, protected springs, ponds, and
traditional wells. In Tirinyi, Kibuku, and Busolwe, 17–20 percent of households have piped water and
receive service from private vendors; yet, the supply is not enough, and they also rely on the sources the
rest of the population relies on, that is boreholes fitted with hand pumps, shallow wells, hand-dug wells,
rainwater harvesting, rivers, and water vendors. In Budaka, 70 percent of residents get water from hand
pumps fitted on deep-drilled wells, and 30 percent from ponds, traditional wells, or protected springs. In
Butaleja, 84 percent of the population relies on boreholes and 16 percent on other resources.
48.
In all the towns, residents and institutions rely on on-site sanitation facilities, mainly simple pit
latrines and a few Ventilated Improved Pit latrines.57 According to CES Consulting Engineers,58 most of the
institutions have inadequate sanitation facilities, both in number and quality and provide little

57 A Ventilated Improved Pit latrine is a pit latrine with a back pipe (vent pipe). It is an improved latrine because it reduces
mosquitos and unpleasant odors.
58 CES Consulting Engineers Salzgitter GmbH. 2015. Consulting Services for Detailed Design for Mbale Water Supply and
Sanitation Project (Small Towns: Butaleja-Busolwe and Budaka-Kadama-Tirinyi-Kibuku). Design Report.

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

opportunity for handwashing. In Tirinyi and Kibuku, two new public toilets have been constructed, but
they are not yet functional. Other than those two toilets, there are no appropriate public sanitation
facilities in any of the growth centers. The most common method of wastewater disposal is by dumping
it in the yard (24 percent), followed by dumping it in soakaway pits (22 percent). Most towns have
problems related to stagnant water.
Interventions Planned for Mbale
49.
The activities planned for Mbale aim to ensure adequate and sustainable water provision for
Mbale Town and six small towns/RGCs until 2040 through the development of new infrastructure as well
as the rehabilitation and expansion of existing systems. Focus will be placed on utilizing raw water sources
more sustainably and increasing energy efficiency of the system. Water works include the construction of
a river intake, a transmission line, a distribution main, and networks. Sanitation activities include the
construction of sewerage networks and a fecal sludge treatment plant and rehabilitation of the
wastewater lagoon system. The Project will also include interventions for catchment management and
source protection, such as restoration and revegetation of river banks. The small towns will be provided
with gravity water supply from the Mbale water system.
50.
The Project expects to increase water coverage from 32 percent to 86 percent. It will benefit
40,000 people with sewerage service.
Table 4.9. Water and Sanitation Service Indicators with and Without Project - Mbale

Current Situation
With Project
Total population (Mbale and surroundings)
380,000
380,000
Population served with water
120,000
325,000
Water coverage
32%
86%
Informal settlements
40,000
40,000
Water coverage
0%
100%
Number of public stand posts
—
Population served with sewerage - Mbale Municipality
14%
40%
Population served with sewerage
14,000
40,000

Costs
51.
Costs of interventions. The cost of the intervention is US$41.1 million, of which 85 percent is for
water systems (including protection of catchment) and 15 percent is for sanitation. The investment cost
was included in the with-Project scenario. The evaluation was conducted using total investment cost
(water and sanitation) but only benefits from water interventions were included.
Table 4.10. Investment Cost - Mbale (US$, millions)
Expansion and improvement of WSS
39.4
Protection of catchment
1.7
Total investment cost
41.1

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

52.
Operating costs were based on financial reports of the Mbale water production system, which in
2017 corresponded to about UGX 2,700 per cubic meter of water produced. The operating costs were
projected using the unit cost and the volume of water produced in each scenario (with and without
Project).
53.
Treatment costs, desilting, and cleaning filters. Treatment cost for the NWSC was on average
UGX 131 per cubic meter produced. Total cost of desilting and cleaning filters in the Mbale production
system was UGX 42 million in 2016 and UGX 50.7 million from January to September 2017. There was no
specific information on the increase of treatment costs and desilting and cleaning filters caused by lack of
proper protection of the catchment and so the benefit was run under different scenarios of improvement.
Economic Benefits
54.
Benefits resulting from the reduction of the price paid for water were estimated as the difference
between prices currently paid (using the lowest price at water points, UGX 500 per jerrycan) minus the
future bill to pay, which was calculated using the NWSC’s tariffs (about UGX 31 per jerrycan). Benefits
resulting from reduction of time spent fetching water were estimated based on information provided by
the NSDS, which corresponds to about 1 hour for the without-Project situation to 15 minutes for
standpipes in the with-Project situation.
55.
Results show that on average, a household in an informal area will save about UGX 700,000 per
year in time previously spent fetching water and UGX 570,000 in the price paid for water. Savings in the
formal areas are UGX 570,000 and UGX 300,000, respectively.
Table 4.11. Coping Costs of Getting Water and Value of Time (UGX, thousands per household per Year)

Informal Areas
Formal Areas

Before
Project
After
Project
Savings
Before
Project
After Project
Savings
Value of time
—
Price paid for water

56.
Results show that the interventions in Mbale will generate expected benefits of US$94 million, of
which 64 percent corresponds to savings in the price paid for water and 36 percent corresponds to savings
in travel time. Benefits from savings in treatment and desilting costs share less than 1 percent of total
costs and their potential impact is negligible. More information is needed to include accurate figures on
the impact of the interventions in the catchment.
Table 4.12. Present Value of Benefits - Mbale

Present Value (US$,
thousands)
%
Value of time
34,138
Price paid for water
59,716
Total
93,854

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

Results of the Economic Evaluation
57.
The economic evaluation shows sound results. Benefits are about 35 percent higher than costs.
The expected net benefit from the intervention is US$23,068 million and the expected return is 12.5
percent. This is higher than the discount rate used for discounting the flows along the lifetime of the
Project.
Table 4.13. Results of Economic Evaluation - Mbale (US$, thousands)

Present Value of Flows

Costs
Benefits
Net Benefits
IRR (%)
All interventions in Mbale
70,786
93,854
23,068
12.5

58.
The results are reassuring given that neither the benefits from sanitation nor the additional
benefits on public health were included.
Financial Benefits
59.
Financial benefits were estimated as the increase in revenues generated from a higher number of
customers and an increase in the volume of water billed. The tariff used was UGX 2,855 per cubic meter
billed, which corresponds to the average revenue per cubic meter billed in Mbale Town.59
Costs
60.
Operating and investment costs of Mbale were included in the financial evaluation. Operating
costs were projected assuming that the unit cost per cubic meter produced would be constant over the
lifetime of the interventions. The unit cost, however, may be reduced given that the Project is expected
to generate efficiencies.
Results of the Financial Evaluation
61.
Financial figures from the NWSC show that revenue in Mbale will cover operating costs and leave
8 percent for investment costs, although full recovery cost (including investment) will not be attained
from revenues.  Analysis of the projected cash flow of the NWSC over the next 10 years is provided under
Table 4.29.

59 Financial figures of NWSC.

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

Table 4.14. Income Statement, Operation in Mbale

FY Ending at
(UGX, millions)
June12
June13
June14
June15
June16
Revenue from Operationsa/
 3,503
 3,919
 4,018
 5,964
 6,751
Operating expenses
 2,537
 2,845
 3,963
 4,426
 5,434
Operating margin (EBITDA)
 1,074
 1,538
 1,317
Depreciation and amortization
 Net Income
 (523)
a/ Operating revenues consist of water and sewerage charges, connection fees, and other fees related to service
provision. Other income such as income grants, exchange rate gains, and investment income are included in nonoperating revenues. The NWSC presents its income statements including as Income both operating and nonoperating income.
Table 4.15. Results of Financial Evaluation - Mbale (US$, thousands)

Present Value of Flows

Costs
Benefits
Net Benefits
Including investment and O&M
78,497
50,223
(28,275)
Including only O&M
35,657
50,223
14,565

Adjumani Water System
62.
Adjumani is in northern Uganda and hosts over 80 percent of the refugees in the country.
Adjumani receives monthly inflows of over 29,815 refugees from South Sudan. Over 96 percent of the
area’s water supply is from the West Nile, where pressure on water resources is high. Water in the region
is provided from existing systems and from water delivered by trucking. The MWE estimates that in the
West Nile region about 31 percent of water is delivered by trucking.
63.
The current water supply levels do not allow refugees to meet their water needs. Refugees must
wait in line for more than an hour to get water from either a borehole, water truck, or tap provided by
humanitarian organizations. Many residents are forced to walk long distances to get water from dirty
streams. The effects of lack of clean water have led to fights between locals and refugees for the resource.
In August 2016, there was a cholera outbreak in the Pagirinya refugee settlement in the Dzaipi sub-county
of the Adjumani district.
64.
A population of about 60,000 people resides in the area, which consists of Adjumani Town Council,
Pakele Town Council, Dzaipi Township, Ciforo, Agojo refugee settlement, Unna Parish (host community),
Mungula refugee settlement, and Orungwa Parish (host community). The influx of refugees has had a
negative impact on water quantities and the quality of sources nearby.
65.
In Adjumani Town Council, the NWSC took over the water supply system in 2014. The source of
water for the system includes five boreholes with a capacity of 1,700 m3/day; however, only three are in
operation, and they experience frequent breakdowns and low power voltage, reducing their capacity to
450 m3/day. The system serves 65 percent of the population (39,000 people). The production per person
per day, however, is just 15.3 L. The population with and without service must complete/meet their water
supply needs from existing boreholes and ponds. Most of these sources are unprotected and unsafe.

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

66.
Many of the water points are privately managed and water is sold at prices ranging from UGX 500
to UGX 1,000 per 20 L jerrycan. The price is significantly higher than the UGX 31 per jerrycan that the
NWSC charges in its service area. Collection of water from point sources also involves walking long
distances and waiting to fill containers.
67.
In Pakele Town Council, the water supply system is managed by Pakele sub-county through an
operator (Top Joy Technical Services). The source of water consists of one borehole that is powered by
solar energy. The capacity of the system is 70 m3/day and average production is 63 m3/day. The system
serves 204 households, which corresponds to 30 percent coverage. The amount of water produced per
person per day is just 18 L. The population obtains the rest of the water from other water sources, most
of which are unsafe and unprotected.
68.
In Ciforo Township, the Ciforo subcounty manages water through a private operator. The source
of water includes one borehole that is powered by solar energy. The capacity of the system is 50 m3/day
and the average production is 37 m3/day. The system serves 114 active connections. The water is not
treated, and the operation is affected by low and fluctuating voltage of the solar-powered system. The
operator charges a standard rate of UGX 2,000 per cubic meter.
69.
Agojo refugee settlement camp has a total population of 4,782 refugees. They currently use trucks
to transport water from the Nile River. The water is not treated, and the trucking fleet experiences
frequent breakdowns.
70.
Mungula refugee settlement has a total population of 2,500. The population gets water for
general use trucked from the Nile River. Water for drinking purposes is received from another refugee
settlement that installed a WTP. The host community for the Mungula refugee settlement is Orungwa
Parish, which has a population of 3,200 people.
71.
In Dzaipi Township, the water system has a capacity of just 50 m3, which yields about 10 lpcd.
72.
In 2016, the NWSC’s operating cost in Adjumani was UGX 3,300 per cubic meter produced (or UGX
3,800 per cubic meter billed). This cost is 65 percent higher than the average unit cost in the whole area
served by the NWSC (about UGX 2,300 per cubic meter billed). The average revenue that the NWSC billed
in the Adjumani area in 2016 was about UGX 3,000 per cubic meter billed, which was 21 percent lower
than the cost. This explains the financial results of the operation, which showed net losses of UGX 100
million. The NWSC has a cross subsidy policy to compensate losses in some regions with profits from
others whose cost is lower.
Table 4.16. Financial Results Operation – Adjumani (UGX, millions)

NWSC

2015–2016
Revenues
359.8
Operating costs
427.6
Operating margin
(67.8)
Depreciation
33.1
Net income
(100.8)

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

Interventions
73.
The Project expects to enable the host districts in the region to cope with the challenges of
providing safe water to their communities amidst emergency situations. It is expected that the Project
interventions will increase both the amount and the quality of water delivered. The interventions will be
operated by the NWSC. The design incorporates the MWE’s recommendation of providing the districts
hosting refugees with about 20 L per person per day.60
74.
 The Project cost is estimated at US$16.6 million and consists mainly of water interventions, with
a small fraction for public toilets (eight in total). For this evaluation, the operating cost was based on
information from the MWE on unit operating costs per district in small towns61 adjusted to 2017 prices
(UGX 1,690 per cubic meter produced).
Economic Benefits
75.
The economic benefits were measured as the sum of savings from decreased coping costs when
water service improves, time spent fetching water decreases, and transportation costs (for trucked water)
decreases.
76.
The savings from decreased coping costs were estimated using the following assumptions: (a)
UGX 500 paid per 20 L jerrycan in Adjumani and Pakele town councils; (b) free water in the refugee
settlements; and (c) households will pay tariffs charged by the NWSC post intervention.
77.
The value of time was estimated using the following assumptions: (a) average monthly income of
UGX 294,000 per household;62 (b) 56 minutes per day spent collecting water in the districts hosting
refugees and 33 minutes in the rest of the areas;63 and (c) time spent fetching water post Project will be
zero in intervention areas, with the exception of the refugee settlement and host communities, where
residents will spend 15 minutes to fetch water from nearby standpipes.
78.
The price of water trucking depends on the conditions of the road, the specific distance from the
water source to the point of delivery, and the capacity of the truck. GIZ64 estimated that the cost of
trucking is between UGX 300,000 and UGX 500,000 per trip.65 For this evaluation, the trucking cost was
estimated at UGX 400,000 for a 10,000 L capacity truck.

60 MWE. 2017. “Water and Sanitation for Districts Hosting Refugees in Northern Uganda. Project Proposal.”
61 MWE. 2009. “Strategic Sector Investment Plan for the Water and Sanitation Sector in Uganda.” The costs were adjusted to
2017 using the inflation rate during the period (55 percent).
62 UBOS. National Household Survey 2016–2017. Page 106. Average monthly income per household in the West Nile region.
63 UBOS. NSDS 2016. 56 minutes corresponds to time spent in rural areas and 33 minutes corresponds to urban areas.
64 GIZ. 2016. “Refugees and Water Resources Management in Northern Uganda.”
65 The same cost is obtained assuming the cost of the truck calculation was based on the price of 10,000 L water truck was US$
30,000, 7-year life span, 5 percent maintenance cost, plus repairs, gas, driver cost, and water from the NWSC. The resulting
value is half as much what the humanitarian aid and civil protection reports in its assessment of solar water schemes.

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

Results of the Economic Evaluation
79.
The economic evaluation shows sound results as benefits are 80 percent higher than costs. Net
benefits are expected to be about US$17 million and the rate of return is expected to be 18.6 percent.
Table 4.17. Results of Economic Evaluation - Adjumani (US$, thousands)

Present Value of Flows

Costs
Benefits
Net Benefits
IRR (%)
Interventions in Adjumani
15,884
33,151
17,267
18.6

80.
Results are reassuring given that other benefits, such as the intervention’s impact on public
health, were not included.
Financial Benefits
81.
The financial benefits were estimated as the increase in revenues generated from a larger
customer base and an increase in the volume billed. The revenue per cubic meter billed used was UGX
2,700 per cubic meter, which corresponds to the average tariff charged in Adjumani plus other charges,
such as connection payments.
Results of the Financial Evaluation - Adjumani
82.
Results of the financial evaluation show that the operation will be financially viable as revenue
will cover operating cost, yet revenue will not be enough to cover investment cost. The operation shows
that revenues will cover operating cost leaving a remnant of US$1.5 million during the lifetime of the
Project.
83.
The service will be provided by the NWSC, which increases the likelihood of financial
sustainability. The investment costs will be funded by the NWSC through the IDA loan.
Table 4.18. Results of Financial Evaluation - Adjumani (US$, thousands)

Present Value of Flows

Costs
Benefits
Net Benefits
Including investment and O&M
18,529
5,369
(13,161)
Including only O&M
3,832
5,369
1,536

A.3. Summary
84.
The expected benefits from the Project are US$144,480 million with an expected return of 17
percent. All interventions yield positive returns, which range from 12.5 percent to 28 percent. Total
benefits are about 50 percent higher than the costs, which gives ample room for uncertainties. Moreover,
if the investment costs for Components 3 and 4 were included in the evaluation, the Project would still
generate net benefits as high as US$119 million with a return of 14 percent.

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

Table 4.19. Summary of the Economic Evaluation. (US$, thousands)

Net Benefits
IRR (%)
Component 1
1.1 Support to Small Towns and Rural Growth Centers
Nyamugasami WSS
23,840
28.6
1.2 Support to Districts Hosting Refugees
80,304

17.2%

Total Component 1
104,144

18.6%

Component 2. WSS in Large Towns and Support to Districts Hosting Refugees
Mbale
23,068
12.5
Adjumani
17,267
18.6
Total Component 2
40,336
14.1
TOTAL
144,480

17.0%

B. Valuation of GHG emissions generated/reduced by the Project
85.
GHG emissions are global externalities, which can be positive or negative, depending on the net
impact of the Project.66 This section presents the methodology used to estimate the GHG emissions and
their valuation using the shadow price of carbon. The annex provides a summary of the analysis. The
complete evaluation is included in the Project files.
B.1. Measurement of GHG emissions
86.
Gross emissions are the emissions Project activities cause over its economic lifetime. These are
compared to a baseline scenario.67 The Project’s net emissions are the difference between the gross
emissions and the baseline emissions. For each component of the Project, the GHG emissions were
estimated in tCO2eq using the World Bank’s Water Global Practice’s GHG Accounting Excel Tool.
87.
Assumptions. All data were provided by the Task Team or calculated based on their inputs, except
where noted. A 20-year economic lifetime was assumed for all Project activities. It was assumed that (a)
the Project’s water supply investments in Nyamugasani would produce 1,042,900 m3 per year; (b) the
water supply investments for the refugee communities under Component 1 would produce 16,467,000
m3 per year; (c) the system for Mbale would produce 2,293,000 m3 per year; (d) the Adjumani water supply
system would produce 164,000 m3 per year; and (e) the system in Nyamugasani would use zero-emission
gravity systems for conveyance to the WTP and distribution. In addition, the default values for the Water
Global Practice’s GHG Accounting Excel Tool for the energy intensity of conveyance, treatment, and
distribution were used given the lack of information on pumping. For all scenarios where source pumping

66 If the net balance is a generation of GHG emissions, the Project is generating a negative externality. If the net balance is a
reduction of GHG emissions, the Project is generating a positive externality.
67 There are three primary approaches to defining a baseline counterfactual; the No Change Scenario assumes the status quo
maintains, the Use of Past Trends approach extrapolates data from the recent past into the near future, and the Use of Future
Trends approach uses advanced modeling to make projections about the future. Elements from any combination of these
approaches may be used when defining a counterfactual.

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

would take place, proxy data68 of a pumping height of 10.36 m with a reasonable pumping efficiency of
75 percent were used. Finally, all electricity consumed due to water supply and wastewater activities was
assumed to be grid-connected electricity unless otherwise specified.
Results and Conclusion
88.
The net emissions of the Project are estimated at −8,124 tCO2eq, while the gross emissions are
estimated at 209,538 tCO2eq. On average, the Project will generate estimated net emissions of −406
tCO2eq annually. The water supply activities in Nyamugasani are estimated to experience net emissions
of 2,054 tCO2eq, while the water supply activities in the refugee host communities covered under
Component 1 will see total net emissions of −31,344 tCO2eq. The water supply activities in Mbale will
generate estimated net emissions of 5,503 tCO2eq, while the water supply activities in Adjumani will
generate estimated net emissions of −3,802 tCO2eq. The wastewater collection and treatment activities
in Mbale will generate estimated net emissions of 19,805 tCO2eq. The main source of emissions reductions
will be replacing water supply tanker truck use with piped systems in refugee host communities. Installing
zero-emission gravity-based systems in Nyamugasani will also result in a reduction of net emissions.
89.
Two other sources of net emissions reductions—solar energy installations and energy efficiency
improvement activities—were not covered in this analysis. Data were not available because the
engineering details of these activities are not yet defined. The rehabilitation of the wastewater treatment
lagoon system in Mbale may also reduce emissions if it leads to better management of methane
production under anaerobic conditions compared to the baseline scenario. This on-site data, however,
were not available at the time of this analysis.
90.
The net emissions for the water supply activities in Nyamugasani break down as follows: −7
tCO2eq from water sourcing, −5 tCO2eq from water conveyance, 1,752 tCO2eq from electricity use for
conventional water treatment, and −26 tCO2eq from potable water distribution.
91.
The net emissions for the water supply activities in the refugee host communities under
Component 1 are as follows: −88,468 tCO2eq due to ending water tanker use, 4,366 tCO2eq from water
sourcing, 4,135 tCO2eq from water conveyance, 28,233 tCO2eq from electricity use for conventional water
treatment, and 20,390 tCO2eq from potable water distribution.
92.
The net emissions for the water supply activities in Mbale break down as follows: 508 tCO2eq from
water sourcing, 392 tCO2eq from water conveyance, 2,673 tCO2eq from electricity use for conventional
water treatment, and 1,931 tCO2eq from potable water distribution.
93.
The net emissions for the water supply activities in Adjumani are as follows: −4,316 tCO2eq due
to ending water tanker use, −12 tCO2eq from water sourcing, 41 tCO2eq from water conveyance, 281
tCO2eq from electricity use for conventional water treatment, and 203 tCO2eq from potable water
distribution.

68 Based on the MWE’s Water Supply Design Manual (Second Edition). The Republic of Uganda, MWE, Water Supply Design
Manual: Second Edition,
https://www.mwe.go.ug/sites/default/files/library/Water%20Supply%20Design%20Manual%20v.v1.1.pdf, p. 8-12.

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

94.
The net emissions for each step of the wastewater collection and treatment activities in Mbale
break down as follows: 1,385 tCO2eq from wastewater collection, 9,881 tCO2eq from electricity use for
overall wastewater treatment, 0 tCO2eq from electricity use for wastewater discharge, 105,437 tCO2eq
from the use of wastewater treatment lagoons, 729 tCO2eq from process N2O emissions from wastewater
treatment, 0 tCO2eq from fugitive N2O emissions from wastewater discharge, and −97,627 tCO2eq from
switching from communal latrines to sewers.
95.
Table 4.20 summarizes the results.
Table 4.20. Net GHG Emissions Caused by the Project
Component
Description
Timeline
(years)
Emissions
Estimate (tCO2eq)
Component 1
Nyamugasani Water Supply
1,714
Component 1
Refugee Host Communities Water Supply
−31,344
Component 2
Mbale Water Supply
5,503
Component 2
Mbale Wastewater Collection and Treatment
19,805
Component 2
Adjumani Water Supply
20s
−3,802
Total

−8,124

B.2. Shadow Price of Carbon
96.
To value the net GHG emissions generated/reduced by the Project, this evaluation used the
shadow price of carbon recommended in the World Bank guidelines,69 which lies between US$40 (low
estimate) and US$80 (high estimate) per ton of CO2eq in 2020 and increases to US$50–US$100 per ton of
CO2eq by 2030. From 2030 to 2050, the guidelines recommend using the same growth rate of 2.25 percent
per year.
97.
Results show that the Project will generate a positive externality as it will reduce GHG emissions
and avoid a cost of US$85,000–US$171,000. The increase in GHG emissions caused by the works in
Nyamugasani, Mbale, and Adjumani will be offset by the reduction gained from works in the refugee
communities.
Table 4.21. Value of Net GHG Emissions
(US$, thousands)
Present Value of Shadow Price of Net GHG
Emissions Generated by the Project

Low
High
Nyamugasani
Refugee communities
(620)
(1,240)
Subtotal Mbale
Adjumani
Total project
(85)
(171)

69 World Bank. 2017 “Shadow Price of Carbon Guidelines.”

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

B.3. Impact on the Results of CBA
98.
The results from the valuation of GHG emissions were included in the CBA. Results show that the
impact of GHG emissions is small. Expected returns are 17 percent for the whole Project with and without
GHG emissions.
Table 4.22. Results of CBA Including and Excluding GHG Emissions
Net Economic Benefits
Net Benefit (US$, thousands)
IRR (%)
Without
GHG
With GHG
Without
GHG
With GHG
Emission
Low
High
Emission
Low
High
Component 1
Ngamugasani WSS
23,840
23,874
23,908
28.6
28.6
28.5
WSS Districts Hosting Refugees
80,304

79,684

79,064

17.2

17.1

17.3

Total Component 1
104,144

103,558

102,972

18.6

18.5

18.7

Component 2
Mbale
23,068
23,177
23,286
12.5
12.5
12.4
Adjumani
17,267
17,659
18,051
18.6
18.8
18.2
Total Component 2
40,336
40,836
41,337
14.1
14.2
14.0
Total
144,480

144,394

144,309

17.0

16.9

17.0

C. Financial Analysis of NWSC
Financial Performance during the Last Five Years: Fiscal Years 2011–2012 to 2015–2016
99.
The NWSC’s responsibilities have grown rapidly. In 2012, the NWSC was providing service to 23
towns; by 2016, the NWSC was providing service to 170 towns, and by January 2018 the number grew to
204. Since 2012, the population NWSC targeted has more than doubled.
Table 4.23. Indicators of WSS Provided by the NWSC

FY Ending at
Indicators
June 2012
June 2013
June 2014
June 2015
June 2016
Target population
3,377,240
3,838,004
4,421,084
5,486,378
7,502,874
Population served water
2,614,090
2,986,773
3,382,050
4,225,325
5,871,224
% Population served water
77%
78%
76%
77%
78%
Number of towns
Water produced (million m3)
86.6
87.3
93.8
99.6
106.0
Water supplied (million m3)
79.8
85.8
92.5
96.4
102.7
Water sales (million m3)
53.8
56.7
61.1
66.4
73.9
 NRW
33%
34%
34%
31%
28%
Water connections
296,206
317,292
366,330
417,938
472,193

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

FY Ending at
Indicators
June 2012
June 2013
June 2014
June 2015
June 2016
% Micro-metering
99%
99%
99%
99%
99%
Sewer connections
17,653
17,888
18,810
19,045
20,355
Revenue collection rate (%)
95%
96%
96%
105%
97%
Source: NWSC Annual Reports.
100.
The NWSC works under three-year performance agreements with the GoU, in which it must meet
specific performance targets, including coverage, NRW, metering, and connection efficiency. The
indicators show high levels of performance, with NRW reduced from 33 percent in 2012 to 28 percent in
2016, almost universal micro-metering, and revenue collection efficiency over 95 percent. The NWSC’s
financial performance shows net profit over the years, in a range of 3–10 percent of operating revenues.
Table 4.24. Income Statement NWSC (UGX, millions)

FY Ending at

June 2012
June 2013
June 2014
June 2015
June 2016
Revenue from operations a/
143,010
159,350
171,413
196,951
258,483
Operating expenses
119,242
130,562
152,378
188,449
215,890
Operating margin (EBITDA)
23,768
28,789
19,035
8,502
42,592
Depreciation and amortization
18,897
19,592
21,852
23,780
26,160
Operating margin before interest
4,871
9,197
(2,818)
(15,278)
16,432
Non-operating Income
12,313
11,029
12,936
24,948
17,579
Interest
2,071
1,274
2,718
EBIT b/
15,114
18,951
9,184
9,075
31,293
Taxes
3,655
10,244
1,419
2,185
6,410
Net Income
11,460
8,707
7,765
6,890
24,883
a/ Operating revenues consist of water and sewerage charges, connection fees, and other fees related to service
provision. Other income such as income grants, exchange rate gains, and investment income are included in nonoperating revenues. The NWSC presents its income statements including both operating and non-operating
income
b/ EBIT = Earnings before interest and taxes = Earnings before interest and taxes.
Table 4.25. Financial Indicators NWSC

FY ending at

June 2012
June 2013
June 2014
June 2015
June
Cost recovery without depreciation
1.20
1.22
1.12
1.05
1.20
Cost recovery with depreciation
1.04
1.06
0.98
0.93
1.07
Operating margin (with depreciation)
3%
6%
−2%
-8%
6%
Net income margin
8%
5%
5%
3%
10%

101.
Fluctuation of financial results may be due to the NWSC’s expansion of service to towns where
cost recovery is not achieved. Production costs vary across regions, while the tariff is the same regardless
of the town/region. According to NWSC figures, current tariffs cover production costs in Kampala and the

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

Central region. In the other regions (Eastern, Northern, Western, and Southwestern), cost recovery is not
achieved. About 80 percent of the NWSC’s revenues and operating costs are generated by Kampala and
the Central region.
Figure 4.1. Cost of Production versus Weighted Average (UGX per m3)

Source: NWSC Annual Report 2015–2016.
102.
The NWSC’s production costs have increased over the last five years by about 40 percent.
Adjusting this increase for inflation (32 percent) results in an 8 percent real increase in production costs.
Figure 4.2. Cost of Production per Cubic Meter (UGX per m3)

Source: NWSC Annual Report 2015–2016.

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

103.
The NWSC applies a uniform tariff policy across the country, differentiated only by the following
customer categories: public standpipes, domestic, institutions/government, and commercial. Since 2004,
the tariff levels have been subjected to automatic annual indexation against the domestic consumer price
index (inflation), exchange rate, foreign price index, and electricity tariffs. The tariffs for the non-domestic
customers is higher than the tariff for domestic consumers.
Table 4.26. Current Tariffs per Cubic Meter (UGX per m3)

2015–2016
Price/Jerrycan
Water Connections

(UGX per m3)
UGX per 20 L
Number
%
Standpipe
1,533
10,841
Domestic
2,490
382,874
Institutions/government
3,065
13,159
Commercial a/
3,760
65,319
Weighted water tariff
2,668
472,193
a/ The tariff for the commercial sector varies according to consumption: (a) up to 1,500 m3 per month, the tariff is
UGX 3,760 per cubic meter and (b) higher than 1,500 m3 has a tariff of UGX 3,005 per cubic meter.

104.
Although tariffs have maintained their real price, production costs have increased in real terms.
The NWSC has counterbalanced this situation with efficiency gains. From 2012 to 2016, the NWSC
successfully decreased NRW from 33 percent to 28 percent, increased collection efficiency from 95
percent to 97 percent and increased its clientele by 60 percent.70 These efficiencies had a positive impact
on financial performance, and by 2016, the NWSC was able to cover its operating costs (including
depreciation) yielding an additional margin of 7 percent of operating revenues.
105.
Capital structure at the NWSC. The NWSC’s 2017 balance sheet shows capital consisting of 64
percent liabilities and 36 percent equity. In 2016, liabilities consisted of (a) 1 percent to outstanding debts;
(b) 76 percent to deferred income; and (c) 23 percent to accounts payable to suppliers and employees.
The outstanding debts consisted of loans from the Stanbic Bank of Uganda and the Bank of Africa. The
loan with the Stanbic Bank was signed in 2011 for a seven-year period, including a two-year grace period,
at an interest rate of about 11.5 percent. It will be fully paid this fiscal year (2017–2018). The outstanding
debt with the Bank of Africa corresponds to an overdraft, short-term loan for UGX 7.9 million.
Table 4.27. Balance Sheet – NWSC (UGX, millions)

Fiscal Year Ending at

June 2012
June 2013
June 2014
June 2015
June 2016
June 2017
Assets

Current assets
131,002
148,303
214,947
227,494
277,995
237,166
Non-current assets
506,655
536,047
587,759
729,972
971,224
1,171,838
Total assets
637,657
684,350
802,705
957,466
1,249,219
1,409,004
Liabilities

Current liabilities
38,634
30,912
50,063
96,268
134,472
166,499

70 The increase in the number of clients is explained mostly by the expansion of the service to small areas. However, some of
these areas have higher operating cost, which bring lower financial returns to the NWSC

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

Fiscal Year Ending at

June 2012
June 2013
June 2014
June 2015
June 2016
June 2017
Non-current liabilities
236,830
282,537
355,295
440,339
638,150
738,599
Total liabilities
275,463
313,450
405,358
536,607
772,622
905,098
Equity
362,194
370,901
397,348
420,859
476,597
503,905
Total liabilities and equity
637,657
684,350
802,705
957,466
1,249,219
1,409,004
Debt/assets ratio
43%
46%
50%
56%
62%
64%
Equity/assets
57%
54%
50%
44%
38%
36%

106.
The NWSC’s deferred income, which corresponds to 76 percent of total liabilities, reached UGX
590 billion in June 2016. From 2012 to 2016, the GoU-financed projects, whose assets are transferred to
the NWSC, account for about UGX 500 billion. This is listed as a liability because under accrual accounting,
the process of transferring funds to the NWSC has not been completed. On an annual basis, a portion of
the deferred income is transferred to the NWSC and then it is listed as revenue from grants.
107.
Investment and financing sources. In the five-year period from 2012 to 2016, the NWSC’s
investment was about US$163 million, of which 98 percent was funded through grants from the GoU. The
NWSC’s main ongoing projects are Kampala Sanitation, Lake Victoria Water and Sanitation Project
(Watsan project), and the Water Management Development Project (IDA).
Table 4.28. NWSC Investment and Financial Sources (US$, millions)

Fiscal Year Ending at

June 2012
June 2013
June 2014
June 2015
June 2016
Total
Investment
12.6
17.8
19.8
45.5
67.5
163.4
Grants
20.8
16.6
33.0
32.9
56.9
160.2
Grants/investment
100%
93%
100%
72%
84%
98%
Projects financed through grants
Kampala sanitation
20.7
8.8
10.2
10.9
18.5
69.0
IDA-WMDP
—
—
6.0
4.9
16.8
27.6
Watsan AfDB/KfW/EU
0.1
6.3
15.0
15.8
20.8
58.0
Others
0.0
1.5
1.9
1.4
0.8
5.6
Total
20.8
16.6
33.0
32.9
56.9
160.2
Source: Calculation based on figures presented in the NWSC Annual Report 2015–16.
Projected Financial Situation
108.
The NWSC projected its financial situation for the next 10-years. The capital investment
requirement includes (a) implementation of the SCAP 100 program71 aimed at upgrading and expanding
WSS services in small towns from the current 204 towns to 750 towns; (b) major capital improvement
program in the existing service area to ensure water security and wastewater management; and (c) minor

71  The NWSC is implementing a project code named ‘SCAP 100’ which is intended to extend water to all villages in towns where
the NWSC operates. The growth in SCAP100 financing requirements is in line with the envisaged expansion in geographical
coverage from the current 230 towns to 750 towns in the next 10 years.

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

capital investment for refurbishment and rehabilitation to maintain operational efficiency.  The NWSC
financial projection also includes associated tariffs and projected operating costs. Tariff was kept the real
value and operating costs were adjusted with efficiency gains based on information provided by the
NWSC. The NWSC expects to reduce operating cost by reducing energy costs from solar power water
supply schemes and gravity fed systems and by consolidating the number of decentralized operating units.
Consequently, cost recovery will improve, yet not able to cover investment costs.
Table 4.29. NWSC Cash Flow Projections for 2018-2028 (UGX, millions)72
Million UGX

Income Statement
2018/
2019 /
2020 /
2021 /
2022 /
2023 /
2024 /
2025 /
2026 /
2027 /
Total
2018-2028
Revenue

428,000

470,800
517,880
569,668
626,635
689,298
758,228
834,051
917,456
1,009,202
6,821,218
Operating Expense

308,000

335,720
365,935
398,869
434,767
473,896
516,547
563,036
613,709
668,943
4,679,422
Operating income

120,000

135,080
151,945
170,799
191,868
215,402
241,681
271,015
303,747
340,259
2,141,796
Interest

5,900

5,310
4,779
4,301
3,871
3,484
3,136
2,822
2,540
2,286
38,429
Net Income

114,100

129,770
147,166
166,498
187,997
211,918
238,545
268,193
301,207
337,973
2,103,367
Cost Recovery Ratio

1.39

1.40
1.42
1.43
1.44
1.45
1.47
1.48
1.49
1.51
1.46
Cash flow from
Operation
2018/
2019 /
2020 /
2021 /
2022 /
2023 /
2024 /
2025 /
2026 /
2027 /
Total
2018-2028
Net Income

114,100

129,770
147,166
166,498
187,997
211,918
238,545
268,193
301,207
337,973
2,103,367
Loan Repayment
Principal

-

3,500
3,500
3,500
3,500
3,500
3,500
3,500
3,500
3,500
31,500
Net cash flow from
operation

114,100

126,270
143,666
162,998
184,497
208,418
235,045
264,693
297,707
334,473
2,071,867

 Investment and
Financing Plan
(Million UGX)
2018/
2019 /
2020 /
2021 /
2022 /
2023 /
2024 /
2025 /
2026 /
2027 /
Total
2018-2028
Investment

757,733

758,825

771,712
825,167
845,843
868,369
892,921
919,689
948,886
980,741
8,678,927

Financed by:

  NWSC

85,900

92,967

109,031
162,998
184,497
208,418
235,045
264,693
297,707
334,473
2,071,868
  Donors

570,597

585,234

295,954
570,597
570,597
570,597
570,597
570,597
570,597
570,597
5,705,970
  GoU

101,236

80,624

366,728
91,572
90,749
89,354
87,278
84,399
80,582
75,671
901,089
  Total

757,733

758,825

771,712
825,167
845,843
868,369
892,921
919,689
948,886
980,741
8,678,927

109.
The cash flow resulting from operation will finance about 20 percent of total investment, and the
80 percent remaining will be financed from donors (70 percent) and the GoU (10 percent). The NWSC
resources would be used to finance: (a) about 58 percent of the SCAP 100; (b) counterpart funds for all
major capital improvement program financed by DPs to cover for the implementation of the RAPs and
network connections; and (c) minor refurbishment and rehabilitation of water systems. It should be noted

72 Financial projection prepared and presented by NWSC.

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

that the current NWSC tariff is not a full cost recovery. Whereas the tariff can cover the operational costs,
depreciation and some contribution to projects, it cannot fully cover the required investment costs
110.
Impact of the credit in NWSC financial projection.  At the time of Project preparation, the terms
of how the GoU will transfer the credit to NWSC was not determined. To help the NWSC and the GoU in
the decision-process, the impact of servicing the credit was measured in the financial projections
presented by the NWSC. IDA financial conditions were applied for the evaluation, that is, service charge
(interest) of 0.75 percent, maturity period of 38 years, and grace period of 6 years. The IDA amount
corresponding to the NWSC is estimated at US$87 million for this Project.
111.
The first scenario was built estimating the required payments for 100 percent of the credit.73
Results show that annual payments of principal and service charge would correspond to less than 1.4
percent of total annual revenues after 2025.  When measured in the net income, the impact would be less
than 4.5 percent.  The annual payment of principal will be UGX 9,726 million, while service charges will be
about UGX 2,300 million. For a total of about UGX 12,000M after 2025.
112.
A second scenario was conducted using 25 percent of the credit on lending. Under the ongoing
WMDP, the subsidiary agreement between NWSC and GoU was signed with a 25 percent on lending and
75 percent on granting to NWSC. Results show that annual payment of principal and service charge would
be UGX 3,000M, or less than 1.1 percent of annual net income after year 2025.
113.
Based on NWSC’s financing forecast (Table 4.29), NWSC is planning to invest from its own
resources about UGX 200,000M in average per year to achieve its 10-year capital improvement plan.
Therefore, in an on-lending arrangement, the NWSC would need to redirect about 2 to 6 percent of its
committed resources annually after 2025 to pay the IDA credit.
Table 4.30. Payments Required to Service the IDA Loan of US$ 87 million (UGX, Million)
 Payments required to
serve the loan
2020 /
2021 /
2022 /
2023 /
2024 /
2025 /
2026 /
2027 /
 Service Charge
1,634
2,101
2,334
2,334
2,261
2,188
2,115
 Principal
-
-
-
-
-
9,726
9,726
9,726
 Total
1,634
2,101
2,334
2,334
11,987
11,914
11,841

 % of debt service in
total revenues
2020 /
2021 /
2022 /
2023 /
2024 /
2025 /
2026 /
2027 /
 Service Charge
0.2%
0.3%
0.3%
0.3%
0.3%
0.3%
0.2%
0.2%
 Principal
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
1.2%
1.1%
1.0%
 Total
0.2%
0.3%
0.3%
0.3%
0.3%
1.4%
1.3%
1.2%

 % of debt service in
net income
2020 /
2021 /
2022 /
2023 /
2024 /
2025 /
2026 /
2027 /
 Service Charge
0.6%
1.0%
1.1%
1.1%
1.0%
0.9%
0.7%
0.6%
 Principal
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
3.7%
3.3%
2.9%
 Total
0.6%
1.0%
1.1%
1.1%
1.0%
4.5%
4.0%
3.5%

73 Impact of fluctuation of local currency was not included

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

D. Financial Analysis of UWA
114.
The Regional Umbrella Model will be applied for works under the rural and small towns
component. Under this model, the UWA staff (the Authorities) will manage a group of small water
schemes, each run by local, private operators.
D.1. Current Financial Performance of Rural Water Schemes
115.
The average O&M costs (scheme operator remuneration, electricity/fuel, chemicals, and routine
maintenance) per cubic meter and tariffs are detailed in Table 4.31.74
Table 4.31. Current Operating Costs and Tariffs Charged in Rural Systems

Cost per m3 Produced
Tariff per m3 Sold

UGX per m3
US$ per m3
UGX per m3
US$ per m3
Solar power supply
1,161
0.32
2,524
0.70
Grid power supply
2,761
0.77
3,540
0.98
Diesel generator (as main source)
4,121
1.14
4,929
1.37
Overall average pumping schemes
2,367
0.66
3,184
0.88

116.
To examine the current financial viability of these systems, the cost recovery rate was estimated
by transforming the cost per cubic meter produced to the cost per cubic meter sold, using the current
NRW level of 29 percent. Results show that solar power schemes cover all operating costs, yet the gridpowered supply systems fall short by about 10 percent. The GoU is planning to replace diesel-powered
schemes with solar-powered systems.
Table 4.32. Cost Recovery Rate in Rural Water Systems

Cost
Tariff
Cost Recovery Level

UGX per m3
UGX per m3

Solar power supply
1,635
2,524
1.54
Grid power supply
3,889
3,540
0.91
Overall average pumping schemes
3,334
3,184
0.96

117.
If the actual collection rate of 75 percent is factored in, the cost recovery would be achieved only
in the solar-powered systems. The grid-powered supply systems would cover only 60 percent of the
operating costs.
D.2. Financial Projection of Regional Umbrella Model
118.
To examine the financial sustainability of the rural systems managed through the Regional
Umbrella Models supported by the Project, five subprojects were used as examples using information
from design studies. These subprojects corresponded to Bisya (GFS), Nyamugasani (GFS), RGC solar water
supply system, Kochi-Kaya (conventional water treatment and river intake), and Ala-Ora water supply.

74 These figures are supported by the Study on Real Cost of Water Supply in Small Towns & RGCs, Hydrophil, May 2014. 11
schemes commissioned between 2001 and 2013 were studied, between 215 and 1,677 connections.

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

119.
In all the systems, the operating cost per cubic meter will decrease gradually as production
increases. Right after the investment is implemented, fixed operating costs will weigh more in the total
operating costs. The weight of these costs will, however, decrease as production increases. Figure 4.3
shows the expected operating cost per cubic meter produced in each of the systems for 2021, 2025, and
2039. In all cases, the highest cost occurs during the first period. The operating costs for Nyamugasani and
Ala-Ora are 70 percent higher than the solar-powered systems and 45 percent more than Bisya’s.
120.
The tariff in each of these systems was not defined at the time of this evaluation, yet the MWE is
planning to establish a tariff 25 percent higher than the operating cost to achieve full cost recovery and
to partially fund investment costs. Tariffs were calculated following the MWE’s guidelines and assuming
a level of NRW of 29 percent. The resulting tariff varies per system from UGX 3,000 per cubic meter to
about UGX 5,000 per cubic meter.
Figure 4.3. Operating Costs and Required Tariff in Some Systems Planned under Rural Component

Source: own calculations based on NWSC data
121.
The resulting bills per household per month would vary from an estimate of UGX 10,000 to UGX
15,000.75 The bill is expected to be affordable given that (a) it lies in the same range as current bills; (b) it
corresponds to 5–6 percent of the monthly income of UGX 200,000–UGX 250,000—the income would be
higher if the value of produce yielded from the customers’ land, which is used either for self-subsistence
or for selling at local markets, was included; and (c) the bills are significantly lower than the prices
currently paid for water.
122.
If the required tariffs are applied, the revenues will cover costs and the systems will be financially
sustainable. The systems will show loss in the first years, but by 2025, all of them will be profitable,
offsetting previous losses.

75 For consumption of 3–4 m3 per month.
Tariff
 -
 1,000
 2,000
 3,000
 4,000
 5,000
 6,000
 7,000
 8,000
Bisya GFS
Nyamugasani
GFS
RGC Solar
Kochi-Kaya
Ala-Ora
O&M costs and  tariff required (UGX per cubic meter
Tariff

Integrated Water Management and Development Project (P163782)

Table 4.33. Net Income Expected from Rural Water Systems Establishing Tariffs according to Guidelines
Profit (Loss) UGX, millions
Bisya GFS
Nyamugasani
RGC Solar
Kochi-Kaya
Ala-Ora
(135)
(7)
(135)

123.
The final figures will depend on actual costs and actual tariffs in each of the Regional Umbrellas.
However, to ensure the sustainability of the works, the guidelines on setting tariffs in rural areas should
include the following: (a) the tariff must fully cover operating costs leaving a margin of at least 25 percent
to better manage and finance the service; (b) tariffs must adjust automatically to variation of costs; (c)
efficiency gains must be required in operation and revenue collection; and (d) management contracts with
mechanisms to ensure compliance must be signed with operators of water schemes.
